# Why Buddhism is True - The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment by Robert Wright (z-lib.org)

## A Note to Readers

**Any book with a title like Why Buddhism Is True should have some careful qualification somewhere along the way. We might as well get that over with:**

qualification

noun UK  /ˌkwɒl.ɪ.fɪˈkeɪ.ʃən/ US  /ˌkwɑː.lə.fəˈkeɪ.ʃən/qualification noun (TRAINING)
B1 [ C ]an official record showing that you have finished a training course or have the necessary skills, etc.
合格证明，资格证书。B2 [ C or U ]an ability, characteristic, or experience that makes you suitable for a particular job or activity
资历，资格；条件；合格性。

**1. I’m not talking about the “supernatural” or more exotically metaphysical parts of Buddhism—reincarnation, for example—but rather about the naturalistic parts: ideas that fall squarely within modern psychology and philosophy. That said, I am talking about some of Buddhism’s more extraordinary, even radical, claims—claims that, if you take them seriously, could revolutionize your view of yourself and of the world. This book is intended to get you to take these claims seriously.**

exotically

adverb UK  /ɪɡˈzɒt.ɪ.kəl.i/ US  /ɪɡˈzɑː.t̬ɪ.kəl.i/ 
in a way that is unusual and exciting because of coming, or seeming to come, from a place that is far away or very different from where you live:异国风情的。
eg：exotically dressed dancers

metaphysical

形而上学。

reincarnation

noun UK  /ˌriː.ɪn.kɑːˈneɪ.ʃən/ US  /ˌriː.ɪn.kɑːrˈneɪ.ʃən/
 
[ U ]
the belief that a dead person's spirit returns to life in another body
轮回转世说
Hindus and Buddhists believe in reincarnation.
印度教徒和佛教徒相信轮回转世说。
 
[ C ]
a person or animal in whose body a dead person's spirit returns to life
（灵魂的）转世化身，化身
He believes he's a reincarnation of Julius Caesar.
他认为自己是尤利乌斯‧恺撒再生。

naturalistic

adjective UK  /ˌnætʃ.ər.əlˈɪs.tɪk/ US  /ˌnætʃ.ɚ.rəˈlɪs.t̬ɪk/
 
Naturalistic art, literature, acting, etc. shows things as they really are.
（艺术、文学、表演等）自然主义的，自然主义风格的
 
similar to what exists in nature
模仿自然的
Most zoos try to exhibit animals in naturalistic settings.
大多数动物园会尽量在类似自然的环境里展出动物。

squarely

adverb UK  /ˈskweə.li/ US  /ˈskwer/
squarely adverb (DIRECTLY)
 
(also square)
directly and firmly
径直地；直截了当地；毫不含糊地
She refused to come down squarely on either side of the argument.
她拒绝直接加入争论的任何一方。
She punched him square on the jaw.
她一拳不偏不倚正中他的下颌。
squarely adverb (STRAIGHT)
 
with weight equally balanced on each side, not to one side
合适地；公正地
She stood squarely, with her feet apart.
她两脚分开，站得笔直。

extraordinary

adjective
UK  /ɪkˈstrɔː.dɪn.ər.i/ US  /ɪkˈstrɔːr.dən.er.i/
 
B1
very unusual, special, unexpected, or strange
非凡的；特别的；意想不到的；令人惊奇的
He told the extraordinary story of his escape.
他讲述了他离奇的逃亡经历。
Her voice had an extraordinary hypnotic quality.
她的嗓音有一种奇特的催眠效果。
an extraordinary coincidence
令人吃惊的巧合

radical

adjective
UK  /ˈræd.ɪ.kəl/ US  /ˈræd.ɪ.kəl/
radical adjective (SUPPORTING CHANGE)
 
C2
believing or expressing the belief that there should be great or extreme social or political change
激进的；过激的；极端的
He was known as a radical reformer/thinker/politician.
他是个著名的激进改革者／思想家／政治家。
These people have very radical views.
这些人观点很偏激。

relating to the most important parts of something or someone; complete or extreme
根本的；彻底的，完全的
We need to make some radical changes to our operating procedures.
我们需要对操作规程进行一些根本性的变革。
I'm just having my hair trimmed - nothing radical.
我正把头发剪短一下——没什么大改变。

UK  /ˈræd.ɪ.kəl/ US  /ˈræd.ɪ.kəl/
 
C2
a person who supports great social and political change
激进分子；极端分子
She was a radical all her life.
她一生都是个激进分子。

**2. I’m of course aware意识到的 that there’s no one Buddhism, but rather various Buddhist traditions传统, which differ相异 on all kinds of doctrines教义. But this book focuses on a kind of “common core”—fundamental基本的 ideas that are found across the major Buddhist traditions, even if they get different degrees of emphasis强调, and may assume假定 somewhat有点 different form, in different traditions.**

**3. I’m not getting into super-fine-grained纹理 parts of Buddhist psychology and philosophy. For example, the Abhidhamma Pitaka, a collection of early Buddhist texts, asserts断言 that there are eighty-nine kinds of consciousness意识, twelve of which are unwholesome不健康的. You may be relieved to hear that this book will spend no time trying to evaluate that claim.**

**4. I realize that true is a trick棘手的y word, and asserting the truth of anything, certainly including deep ideas in philosophy or psychology, is a tricky business. In fact, one big lesson from Buddhism is to be suspicious可疑的 of the intuition直觉 that your ordinary way of perceiving察觉 the world brings you the truth about it. Some early Buddhist writings go so far as to raise doubts about whether such a thing as “truth” ultimately根本上 exists. On the other hand, the Buddha, in his most famous sermon布道, lays奠定 out what are commonly called “The Four Noble Truths,”四圣谛 so it’s not as if the word true has no place in discussions of Buddhist thought. In any event, I’ll try to proceed继续 with appropriate适当的 humility谦卑 and nuance细微的差别 as I make my argument that Buddhism’s diagnosis诊断 of the human predicament困境 is fundamentally从根本上讲 correct, and that its prescription处方 is deeply valid and urgently急迫地 important.**

**5. Asserting断言 the validity有效性 of core核心 Buddhist ideas doesn’t necessarily say anything, one way or the other, about other spiritual or philosophical traditions. There will sometimes be logical tension矛盾 between a Buddhist idea and an idea in another tradition, but often there won’t be. The Dalai Lama has said, “Don’t try to use what you learn from Buddhism to be a better Buddhist; use it to be a better whatever-you-already-are.”—Robert Wright**

## 1 Taking the Red Pill

**At the risk of冒着…危险 overdramatizing过分戏剧性地表达 the human condition状况: Have you ever seen the movie The Matrix矩阵?黑客帝国**

**It’s about a guy named Neo (played by Keanu Reeves), who discovers that he’s been inhabiting居住 a dream world. The life he thought he was living is actually an elaborate复杂的 hallucination幻觉. He’s having that hallucination while, unbeknownst不知不觉 to him, his actual physical body is inside a gooey黏黏糊糊的, coffin棺材-size pod豆荚—one among many pods, rows排 and rows of pods, each pod containing a human being absorbed被…吸引住 in a dream. These people have been put in their pods by robot overlords霸主 and given dream lives as pacifiers安抚奶嘴.**

**The choice faced by Neo—to keep living a delusion错觉 or wake up to reality—is famously captured捕获 in the movie’s “red pill” scene场景. Neo has been contacted by rebels造反者 who have entered his dream (or, strictly严格地 speaking, whose avatars虚拟化身 have entered his dream). Their leader, Morpheus (played by Laurence Fishburne), explains the situation to Neo: “You are a slave, Neo. Like everyone else, you were born into bondage奴役, into a prison that you cannot taste or see or touch—a prison for your mind.” The prison is called the Matrix, but there’s no way to explain to Neo what the Matrix ultimately最终 is. The only way to get the whole picture, says Morpheus, is “to see it for yourself.” He offers Neo two pills, a red one and a blue one. Neo can take the blue pill and return to his dream world, or take the red pill and break through the shroud遮蔽 of delusion. Neo chooses the red pill.**

**That’s a pretty stark严酷的 choice: a life of delusion and bondage or a life of insight领悟 and freedom. In fact, it’s a choice so dramatic戏剧性的 that you’d think a Hollywood movie is exactly where it belongs—that the choices we really get to make about how to live our lives are less momentous重大的 than this, more pedestrian缺乏想象的. Yet when that movie came out, a number of people saw it as mirroring反映 a choice they had actually made.**

**The people I’m thinking about are what you might call Western Buddhists, people in the United States and other Western countries who, for the most part, didn’t grow up Buddhist but at some point adopted采纳 Buddhism. At least they adopted a version版本 of Buddhism, a version that had been stripped剥去 of some supernatural elements元素 typically通常 found in Asian Buddhism, such as belief in reincarnation转世 and in various deities神灵. This Western Buddhism centers集中 on a part of Buddhist practice that in Asia is more common among monks僧侣 than among laypeople俗人: meditation冥想, along with immersion沉浸 in Buddhist philosophy. (Two of the most common Western conceptions构想 of Buddhism—that it’s atheistic无神论者 and that it revolves环绕 around meditation—are wrong; most Asian Buddhists do believe in gods, though not an omnipotent万能的 creator God, and don’t meditate.)**

**These Western Buddhists, long before they watched The Matrix, had become convinced确信 that the world as they had once seen it was a kind of illusion幻觉—not an out-and-out彻头彻尾 hallucination幻觉 but a seriously warped扭曲的 picture of reality that in turn warped their approach方法 to life, with bad consequences for them and the people around them. Now they felt that, thanks to meditation冥想 and Buddhist philosophy, they were seeing things more clearly. Among these people, The Matrix seemed an apt恰当的 allegory寓言 of the transition变迁 they’d undergone经受, and so became known as a “dharma达摩 movie.” The word dharma has several meanings, including the Buddha’s teachings and the path成功的途径 that Buddhists should tread in response to those teachings. In the wake of 随着…而来The Matrix, a new shorthand速记 for “I follow the dharma” came into currency流行: “I took the red pill.”**

**I saw The Matrix in 1999, right after it came out, and some months later I learned that I had a kind of connection to it. The movie’s directors, the Wachowski siblings兄弟姐妹, had given Keanu Reeves three books to read in preparation for playing Neo. One of them was a book I had written a few years earlier, The Moral道德的 Animal: Evolutionary进化的 Psychology and Everyday Life.**

**I’m not sure what kind of link the directors saw between my book and The Matrix. But I know what kind of link I see. Evolutionary psychology can be described in various ways, and here’s one way I had described it in my book: It is the study of how the human brain was designed—by natural selection—to mislead us, even enslave us.**

**Don’t get me wrong: natural selection has its virtues优点美德, and I’d rather be created by it than not be created at all—which, so far as I can tell, are the two options this universe offers. Being a product of evolution is by no means entirely a story of enslavement奴役 and delusion错觉妄想. Our evolved进化 brains empower使控制局势 us in many ways, and they often bless us with a basically accurate精确的 view of reality.**

**Still, ultimately根本上, natural selection cares about only one thing (or, I should say, “cares”—in quotes引号—about only one thing, since natural selection is just a blind process过程, not a conscious有意识的 designer). And that one thing is getting genes into the next generation. Genetically遗传上地 based traits特点 that in the past contributed贡献 to genetic遗传的 proliferation激增 have flourished繁荣, while traits that didn’t have fallen by the wayside. And the traits that have survived this test include mental思想的 traits—structures结构 and algorithms算法 that are built into the brain and shape our everyday experience. So if you ask the question “What kinds of perceptions感知 and thoughts and feelings guide us through life each day?” the answer, at the most basic level, isn’t “The kinds of thoughts and feelings and perceptions that give us an accurate精确的 picture of reality.” No, at the most basic level the answer is “The kinds of thoughts and feelings and perceptions that helped our ancestors祖先 get genes into the next generation.” Whether those thoughts and feelings and perceptions give us a true view of reality is, strictly严格地 speaking, beside the point. As a result, they sometimes don’t. Our brains are designed to, among other things, delude欺骗 us.**

**Not that there’s anything wrong with that! Some of my happiest moments have come from delusion—believing, for example, that the Tooth Fairy would pay me a visit after I lost a tooth. But delusion can also produce bad moments. And I don’t just mean moments that, in retrospect回顾, are obviously delusional妄想的, like horrible nightmares. I also mean moments that you might not think of as delusional, such as lying awake at night with anxiety焦虑. Or feeling hopeless, even depressed抑郁的, for days on end. Or feeling bursts爆发 of hatred仇恨 toward people, bursts that may actually feel good for a moment but slowly corrode腐蚀 your character. Or feeling bursts of hatred toward yourself. Or feeling greedy贪婪的, feeling a compulsion强迫 to buy things or eat things or drink things well beyond the point where your well-being幸福 is served.**

**Though these feelings—anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/, despair绝望, hatred, greed贪婪—aren’t delusional the way a nightmare is delusional, if you examine them closely, you’ll see that they have elements元素 of delusion, elements you’d be better off without.**

**And if you think you would be better off, imagine how the whole world would be. After all, feelings like despair and hatred and greed can foster促进 wars and atrocities暴行. So if what I’m saying is true—if these basic sources of human suffering and human cruelty残忍 are indeed的确 in large part the product of delusion—there is value in exposing暴露 this delusion to the light.**

**Sounds logical, right? But here’s a problem that I started to appreciate欣赏 shortly after I wrote my book about evolutionary进化的 psychology: the exact准确的 value of exposing暴露 a delusion to the light depends on what kind of light you’re talking about. Sometimes understanding the ultimate最后的 source of your suffering doesn’t, by itself, help very much.**

### An Everyday Delusion

**Let’s take a simple but fundamental基本的 example: eating some junk废旧物品 food, feeling briefly短暂地 satisfied, and then, only minutes later, feeling a kind of crash崩溃 and maybe a hunger for more junk food. This is a good example to start with for two reasons.**

**First, it illustrates说明 how subtle不易察觉的 our delusions can be. There’s no point in the course of eating a six-pack of small powdered-sugar doughnuts甜甜圈 when you’re believing that you’re the messiah弥赛亚 or that foreign agents are conspiring密谋 to assassinate暗杀 you. And that’s true of many sources of delusion that I’ll discuss in this book: they’re more about illusion—about things not being quite what they seem—than about delusion in the more dramatic戏剧性的 sense of that word. Still, by the end of the book, I’ll have argued that all of these illusions do add up to a very large-scale规模 warping扭曲 of reality, a disorientation迷失方向 that is as significant重要的 and consequential相应的 as out-and-out delusion.**

**The second reason junk food is a good example to start with is that it’s fundamental根本法则/基本的 to the Buddha’s teachings. Okay, it can’t be literally字面上 fundamental基本的 to the Buddha’s teachings, because 2,500 years ago, when the Buddha taught, junk food as we know it didn’t exist. What’s fundamental to the Buddha’s teachings is the general全体的 dynamic动态 of being powerfully drawn使感兴趣 to sensory感觉的 pleasure that winds up结束 being fleeting转瞬即逝的 at best充其量. One of the Buddha’s main messages was that the pleasures we seek evaporate蒸发/衰减 quickly and leave us thirsting口渴的 for more. We spend our time looking for the next gratifying使满意 thing—the next powdered-sugar doughnut甜甜圈, the next sexual encounter遭遇, the next status-enhancing增强 promotion晋升, the next online purchase购买. But the thrill兴奋 always fades逐渐消失, and it always leaves us wanting more. The old Rolling Stones lyric歌词 “I can’t get no satisfaction” is, according to Buddhism, the human condition状态. Indeed, though the Buddha is famous for asserting断言 that life is pervaded弥漫 by suffering, some scholars/ˈskɑlərz/学者 say that’s an incomplete不完整的 rendering扮演/翻译 of his message and that the word translated as “suffering,” dukkha/ˈduːkə/苦, could, for some purposes, be translated as “unsatisfactoriness不满意.”**

**So what exactly is the illusory虚幻的 part of pursuing追求 doughnuts or sex or consumer消费者 goods or a promotion晋升? There are different illusions associated相关的 with different pursuits追求, but for now we can focus on one illusion that’s common to these things: the overestimation高估 of how much happiness they’ll bring. Again, by itself this is delusional only in a subtle不易察觉的 sense. If I asked you whether you thought that getting that next promotion, or getting an A on that next exam, or eating that next powdered-sugar doughnut/ˈdoʊnʌt/ would bring you eternal不朽的 bliss幸福, you’d say no, obviously not. On the other hand, we do often pursue追求 such things with, at the very least, an unbalanced view of the future. We spend more time envisioning设想 the perks补贴 that a promotion will bring than envisioning the headaches it will bring. And there may be an unspoken不言而喻的 sense that once we’ve achieved this long-sought寻求 goal, once we’ve reached the summit顶点, we’ll be able to relax, or at least things will be enduringly持久地 better. Similarly, when we see that doughnut sitting there, we immediately imagine how good it tastes, not how intensely强烈的 we’ll want another doughnut only moments after eating it, or how we’ll feel a bit tired or agitated激动的 later, when the sugar rush糖潮 subsides消退.**

### Why Pleasure Fades

**It doesn’t take a rocket火箭 scientist to explain why this sort of distortion扭曲 would be built into human anticipation期待. It just takes an evolutionary进化的 biologist—or, for that matter, anyone willing to spend a little time thinking about how evolution works.**

**Here’s the basic logic. We were “designed” by natural selection to do certain things that helped our ancestors祖先 get their genes into the next generation—things like eating, having sex, earning the esteem尊重 of other people, and outdoing胜过 rivals对手. I put “designed” in quotation引用 marks because, again, natural selection isn’t a conscious有意识的, intelligent聪明的 designer but an unconscious process过程. Still, natural selection does create organisms/ˈɔrgəˌnɪzəmz/生物 that look as if they’re the product产品 of a conscious designer, a designer who kept fiddling摆弄/伪造 with them to make them effective gene propagators/ˈprɑːpəɡeɪtərz/传播者. So, as a kind of thought experiment, it’s legitimate正当合理的 to think of natural selection as a “designer” and put yourself in its shoes and ask: If you were designing organisms to be good at spreading their genes, how would you get them to pursue贯彻 the goals that further this cause? In other words, granted that就算… eating, having sex, impressing使钦佩 peers同龄人, and besting战胜 rivals对手 helped our ancestors spread their genes, how exactly would you design their brains to get them to pursue these goals? I submit主张 that at least three basic principles of design would make sense:**

**1. Achieving these goals should bring pleasure, since animals, including humans, tend to pursue things that bring pleasure.**

**2. The pleasure shouldn’t last forever. After all, if the pleasure didn’t subside减弱, we’d never seek寻找 it again; our first meal would be our last, because hunger would never return. So too with sex: a single act of intercourse交往, and then a lifetime of lying there basking晒太阳 in the afterglow余辉. That’s no way to get lots of genes into the next generation!**

**3. The animal’s brain should focus more on (1), the fact that pleasure will accompany陪同 the reaching of a goal, than on (2), the fact that the pleasure will dissipate消散 shortly thereafter之后. After all, if you focus on (1), you’ll pursue things like food and sex and social status with unalloyed纯粹的 gusto热情, whereas鉴于 if you focus on (2), you could start feeling ambivalence矛盾心理. You might, for example, start asking what the point is of so fiercely激烈的 pursuing追求 pleasure if the pleasure will wear off逐渐消失 shortly after you get it and leave you hungering for more. Before you know it, you’ll be full of ennui/ɑːnˈwiː/无聊 and wishing you’d majored主修 in philosophy.**

**If you put these three principles of design together, you get a pretty plausible看似合理的 explanation of the human predicament尴尬的处境/困境 as diagnosed by the Buddha. Yes, as he said, pleasure is fleeting转瞬即逝的, and, yes, this leaves us recurrently/rɪˈkɜːrəntli/ dissatisfied. And the reason is that pleasure is designed by natural selection to evaporate蒸发/衰减 so that the ensuing接踵而来的 dissatisfaction will get us to pursue追求 more pleasure. Natural selection doesn’t “want” us to be happy, after all; it just “wants” us to be productive富有成效的, in its narrow狭窄的 sense（狭义） of productive. And the way to make us productive is to make the anticipation期待 of pleasure very strong but the pleasure itself not very long-lasting.**

**Scientists can watch this logic play out at the biochemical生物化学 level by observing dopamine/ˈdoʊpəmiːn/多巴胺, a neurotransmitter/ˈnʊroʊtrænzmɪtər/神经递质 that is correlated相互关联影响 with pleasure and the anticipation/ænˌtɪsɪˈpeɪʃn/期待 of pleasure. In one seminal影响深远的 study, they took monkeys and monitored/ˈmɑːnɪtərd/监控 dopamine-generating生成 neurons/ˈnʊrɑnz/神经元 as drops of sweet juice fell onto the monkeys’ tongues. Predictably可以预见，, dopamine was released right after the juice touched the tongue. But then the monkeys were trained to expect预料 drops of juice after a light turned on. As the trials试验/实验 proceeded进行, more and more of the dopamine came when the light turned on, and less and less came after the juice hit the tongue.**

**We have no way of knowing for sure what it felt like to be one of those monkeys, but it would seem that, as time passed, there was more in the way of anticipating/ænˈtɪsɪpeɪtɪŋ/预期 the pleasure that would come from the sweetness令人愉快/甜蜜, yet less in the way of pleasure actually coming from the sweetness. To translate this conjecture猜想 into everyday human terms术语:**

**If you encounter与…邂逅 a new kind of pleasure—if, say, you’ve somehow不知怎地 gone your whole life without eating a powdered粉状-sugar doughnut, and somebody hands you one and suggests you try it—you’ll get a big blast爆炸 of dopamine after the taste of the doughnut sinks下沉 in. But later, once you’re a confirmed证实 powdered/ˈpaʊdərd/-sugar-doughnut eater, the lion’s share of the dopamine spike尖峰 comes before you actually bite咬 into the doughnut, as you’re staring凝视 longingly渴望地 at it; the amount that comes after the bite is much less than the amount you got after that first, blissful幸福的 bite into a powdered-sugar doughnut. The pre-bite咬前 dopamine blast you’re now getting is the promise of more bliss, and the post-bite咬后 drop减少 in dopamine is, in a way, the breaking of the promise—or, at least, it’s a kind of biochemical acknowledgment致谢 that there was some overpromising过分夸耀. To the extent程度 that you bought the promise—anticipated预期的 greater pleasure than would be delivered交付 by the consumption消耗 itself—you have been, if not deluded哄骗 in the strong sense of that term, at least misled误导.**

**Kind of cruel残酷的, in a way—but what do you expect预料 from natural selection? Its job is to build machines that spread genes, and if that means programming some measure测量 of illusion into the machines, then illusion there will be.**

### Unhelpful Insights

**So this is one kind of light science can shed on披上 an illusion. Call it “Darwinian达尔文的 light.” By looking at things from the point of view of natural selection, we see why the illusion would be built into us, and we have more reason than ever to see that it is an illusion. But—and this is the main point of this little digression/daɪˈɡreʃ.ən/离题—this kind of light is of limited value if your goal is to actually liberate解放 yourself from the illusion.**

**Don’t believe me? Try this simple experiment: (1) Reflect on反省/思考 the fact that our lust强烈欲望 for doughnuts and other sweet things is a kind of illusion—that the lust implicitly含蓄地 promises承诺 more enduring持久的 pleasure than will result from succumbing屈服 to it, while blinding致盲 us to the letdown失望 that may ensue接踵而至. (2) As you’re reflecting on this fact, hold a powdered-sugar doughnut six inches from your face. Do you feel the lust for it magically weakening弱化? Not if you’re like me, no.**

**This is what I discovered after immersing沉浸 myself in evolutionary psychology: knowing the truth about your situation, at least in the form that evolutionary psychology provides it, doesn’t necessarily make your life any better. In fact, it can actually make it worse. You’re still stuck卡住了 in the natural human cycle of ultimately最终 futile徒然的 pleasure-seeking—what psychologists sometimes call “the hedonic/həˈdɑnɪk/享乐的 treadmill单调的工作/跑步机”—but now you have new reason to see the absurdity/əbˈsɜrdəti/荒谬 of it. In other words, now you see that it’s a treadmill, a treadmill specifically/spəˈsɪfɪkli/明确地 designed to keep you running, often without really getting anywhere—yet you keep running!**

**And powdered-sugar doughnuts are just the tip of一角 the iceberg冰山. I mean, the truth is, it’s not all that uncomfortable to be aware of意识到 the Darwinian/ˌdɑrˈwɪniən/ logic behind your lack of dietary/ˈdaɪəteri/饮食的 self-discipline/ˌself ˈdɪsəplɪn/. In fact, you may find in this logic a comforting安慰 excuse: it’s hard to fight Mother Nature, right? But evolutionary psychology also made me more aware of how illusion shapes other kinds of behavior, such as the way I treat other people and the way I, in various senses, treat myself. In these realms/rɛlmz/领域, Darwinian self-consciousness自我意识 was sometimes very uncomfortable.**

**Yongey Mingyur Rinpoche, a meditation冥想 teacher in the Tibetan/tiˈbɛtən/藏语 Buddhist tradition, has said, “Ultimately/ˈʌltɪmətli/最终, happiness comes down to choosing between the discomfort of becoming aware of your mental afflictions苦恼 and the discomfort of being ruled by them.” What he meant is that if you want to liberate解放 yourself from the parts of the mind that keep you from realizing true happiness, you have to first become aware of them, which can be unpleasant.**

**Okay, fine; that’s a form of painful self-consciousness自我意识 that would be worthwhile值得的—the kind that leads ultimately最终 to deep happiness. But the kind I got from evolutionary psychology was the worst of both worlds: the painful self-consciousness without the deep happiness. I had both the discomfort of being aware of my mental afflictions苦恼 and the discomfort of being ruled by them.**

**Jesus said, “I am the way and the truth and the life.” Well, with evolutionary psychology I felt I had found the truth. But, manifestly/ˈmæn.ə.fest.li/ 明显地, I had not found the way. Which was enough to make me wonder about another thing Jesus said: that the truth will set you free. I felt I had seen the basic truth about human nature, and I saw more clearly than ever how various illusions imprisoned监禁 me, but this truth wasn’t amounting等同 to a Get Out of Jail Free card.**

**So is there another version版本 of the truth out there that would set me free? No, I don’t think so. At least, I don’t think there’s an alternative/ɔːlˈtɜːrnətɪv/可供替代的 to the truth presented by science; natural selection, like it or not, is the process that created us. But some years after writing The Moral Animal, I did start to wonder if there was a way to operationalize/ɒpəˈreɪʃ(ə)n(ə)lʌɪz/操作化 the truth—a way to put the actual, scientific truth about human nature and the human condition条件 into a form that would not just identify and explain the illusions we labor苦干 under but would also help us liberate ourselves from them. I started wondering if this Western Buddhism I was hearing about might be that way. Maybe many of the Buddha’s teachings were saying essentially/ɪˈsenʃəli/本质上 the same thing modern psychological science says. And maybe meditation冥想 was in large part a different way of appreciating/əˈpriːʃieɪtɪŋ/欣赏 these truths—and, in addition此外, a way of actually doing something about them.**

**So in August 2003 I headed to前往 rural/ˈrʊrəl/乡村的 Massachusetts/ˌmæsəˈtʃusəts/马塞诸塞州 for my first silent meditation冥想 retreat躲避—a whole week devoted专心致志 to meditation and devoid缺乏 of such distractions分心 as email, news from the outside world, and speaking to other human beings.**

### The Truth about Mindfulness/ˈmaɪnd.fəl.nəs/正念认知

**You could be excused原谅 for doubting that a retreat静修 like this would yield/jiːld/屈服 anything very dramatic戏剧性的 or profound意义深远的. The retreat was, broadly speaking, in the tradition of “mindfulness meditation,”正念冥想 the kind of meditation that was starting to catch on in the West and that in the years since has gone mainstream主流. As commonly described, mindfulness—the thing mindfulness meditation aims to cultivate培养—isn’t very deep or exotic/ɪɡˈzɑːtɪk/异国情调的. To live mindfully正念 is to pay attention to, to be “mindful of”铭记 what’s happening in the here and now and to experience it in a clear, direct way, unclouded晴朗的/不受...困扰 by various mental obfuscations/ɒbfʌsˈkeɪʃ(ə)n/困扰. Stop and smell the roses.**

**This is an accurate精确的 description of mindfulness as far as it goes. But it doesn’t go very far. “Mindfulness,” as popularly conceived构想, is just the beginning of mindfulness.**

**And it’s in some ways a misleading beginning. If you delve翻找 into ancient古代的 Buddhist writings, you won’t find a lot of exhortations/ˌɛgˌzɔrˈteɪʃənz/规劝 to stop and smell the roses—and that’s true even if you focus on those writings that feature the word sati, the word that’s translated as “mindfulness.” Indeed, sometimes these writings seem to carry a very different message. The ancient Buddhist text known as The Four Foundations of Mindfulness—the closest thing there is to a Bible of Mindfulness—reminds us that our bodies are “full of various kinds of unclean things” and instructs/ɪnˈstrʌkts/指示 us to meditate冥想 on such bodily/ˈbɑːdɪli/人体的 ingredients成分 as “feces/ˈfiːsiːz/粪便, bile胆汁, phlegm/flem/痰, pus脓液, blood, sweat/swet/汗, fat, tears, skin-oil, saliva/səˈlaɪvə/唾液, mucus/ˈmjuːkəs/鼻涕, fluid/ˈfluːɪd/液体 in the joints/dʒɔɪnts/关节, urine/ˈjʊrɪn/尿.” It also calls for us to imagine our bodies “one day, two days, three days dead—bloated/ˈbloʊtɪd/膨胀, livid乌青色的, and festering溃烂/化脓.”**

**I’m not aware of意识到 any bestselling books on mindfulness meditation called Stop and Smell the Feces/ˈfiːsiːz/粪便. And I’ve never heard a meditation teacher recommend推荐 that I meditate冥想 on my bile胆汁, phlegm/flem/痰, and pus脓液 or on the rotting/ˈrɑːtɪŋ/腐烂 corpse/kɔːrps/尸体 that I will someday be. What is presented today as an ancient meditative沉思的 tradition is actually a selective选择性的 rendering翻译 of an ancient meditative沉思的/ tradition, in some cases carefully manicured/ˈmænɪkjʊrd/修剪.**

**There’s no scandal/ˈskændl/丑行 here. There’s nothing wrong with modern interpreters/ɪnˈtɜrprətərz/口译员 of Buddhism being selective—even, sometimes, creative—in what they present as Buddhism. All spiritual traditions evolve/iˈvɑːlv/发展, adapting使适应 to time and place, and the Buddhist teachings that find an audience today in the United States and Europe are a product of such evolution进化.**

**The main thing, for our purposes, is that this evolution—the evolution that has produced a distinctively显著地 Western, twenty-first-century version of Buddhism—hasn’t severed the connection between current现在的 practice and ancient thought. Modern mindfulness meditation isn’t exactly the same as ancient mindfulness meditation, but the two share a common philosophical foundation基础. If you follow the underlying隐含的/根本的 logic of either of them far enough, you will find a dramatic戏剧性的 claim: that we are, metaphorically/ˌmɛtəˈfɒrɪk(ə)li/隐喻地 speaking, living in the Matrix. However mundane/mʌnˈdeɪn/单调的 mindfulness meditation may sometimes sound听起来好像, it is a practice that, if pursued追求 rigorously/ˈrɪgərəsli/严格的, can let you see what Morpheus莫菲斯 says the red pill will let you see. Namely即, “how deep the rabbit hole goes.”**

**On that first meditation retreat静修, I had some pretty powerful experiences—powerful enough to make me want to see just how deep the rabbit hole goes. So I read more about Buddhist philosophy, and talked to experts on Buddhism, and eventually went on more meditation retreats, and established/ɪˈstæblɪʃt/确立 a daily meditation practice.**

**All of this made it clearer to me why The Matrix had come to be known as a “dharma/ˈdɑːrmə/达摩佛法 movie.” Though evolutionary psychology had already convinced使确信 me that people are by nature pretty deluded欺骗/迷惑, Buddhism, it turned out, painted an even more dramatic戏剧化 picture. In the Buddhist view, the delusion错觉 touches everyday perceptions感知 and thoughts in ways subtler/ˈsʌtələr/微妙的 and more pervasive/pərˈveɪsɪv/普遍的 than I had imagined. And in ways that made sense to me. In other words, this kind of delusion, it seemed to me, could be explained as the natural product of a brain that had been engineered/ˌendʒɪˈnɪrd/设计制造 by natural selection. The more I looked into Buddhism, the more radical根本的 it seemed, but the more I examined it in the light of根据 modern psychology, the more plausible/ˈplɔːzəbl/看似合理的 it seemed. The real-life Matrix, the one in which we’re actually embedded嵌入的, came to seem more like the one in the movie—not quite as mind-bending扭曲,费解 maybe, but profoundly深刻地 deceiving欺骗 and ultimately/ˈʌltɪmətli/最终 oppressive压迫的, and something that humanity urgently紧急地 needs to escape.**

**The good news is the other thing I came to believe: if you want to escape from the Matrix, Buddhist practice and philosophy offer powerful hope. Buddhism isn’t alone in this promise. There are other spiritual traditions that address the human predicament with insight and wisdom. But Buddhist meditation, along with its underlying philosophy, addresses that predicament/prɪˈdɪkəmənt/窘境 in a strikingly/'straɪkɪŋli/惊人的 direct and comprehensive综合的 way. Buddhism offers an explicit/ɪkˈsplɪsɪt/明确的 diagnosis of the problem and a cure. And the cure, when it works, brings not just happiness but clarity/ˈklærəti/清晰 of vision: the actual truth about things, or at least something way, way closer to that than our everyday view of them.**

**Some people who have taken up开始 meditation in recent years have done so for essentially本质上 therapeutic/ˌθerəˈpjuːtɪk/治疗的 reasons. They practice mindfulness-based stress强调 reduction/rɪˈdʌkʃn/减少 or focus on some specific personal problem. They may have no idea that the kind of meditation冥想 they’re practicing can be a deeply spiritual endeavor/ɪnˈdɛvər/努力 and can transform their view of the world. They are, without knowing it, near the threshold/ˈθreʃhoʊld/门槛 of a basic choice, a choice that only they can make. As Morpheus says to Neo, “I can only show you the door. You’re the one that has to walk through it.” This book is an attempt to show people the door, give them some idea of what lies beyond it, and explain, from a scientific standpoint立场, why what lies beyond it has a stronger claim to being real than the world they’re familiar with.**

## 2 Paradoxes/ˈpɛrəˌdɑksɪz/悖论 of Meditation冥想

**I’m not supposed to tell you about my first big success at meditating. The reason is that there isn’t supposed to be success at meditating. As any good meditation teacher will tell you, if you talk about meditation in terms of success or failure, you’re misunderstanding what meditation is.**

**Here I must depart离开 from orthodoxy/ˈɔːrθədɑːksi/正统. I wouldn’t advocate/ˈædvəkeɪt , ˈædvəkət/提倡 meditation if I didn’t think there was something people could achieve by it. And if people don’t achieve that something, well, that would constitute failure, right? As in:比如 the opposite of success.**

**Granted的确, it may be best for people who are meditating to not think about succeeding, but that’s because thinking about succeeding gets in the way of success! And, granted, if you do achieve meditative “success,” that may lead to a new frame框架 of mind that is less caught up赶上 in the pursuit追求 of success than your old frame of mind—less心不在焉 relentlessly/rɪˈlɛntləsli/无情地 focused on achieving certain kinds of distant material客观存在的 goals, more aware of意识到 the here and now.**

**In sum:总之 you can best achieve success at meditation by not pursuing success, and achieving this success may mean caring less about success, at least as success is conventionally按惯例 defined. If this sounds unbearably难以忍受 paradoxical/ˌpærəˈdɑːksɪkl/矛盾, maybe you should quit reading here, because this won’t be the last time we find paradox/ˈpærədɑːks/悖论 in Buddhist practice or Buddhist teachings. Then again, there’s paradoxical stuff in modern physics (an electron/ɪˈlektrɑːn/电子 is both a particle粒子 and a wave), and modern physics works fine. So you might as well keep reading.**

**Anyway, before I violate/ˈvaɪəleɪt/违背 protocol/ˈproʊtəkɑːl/规程 by telling you about my first big “success” as a meditator, I have to commit another violation of protocol by noting what a naturally bad meditator I am. That you shouldn’t talk about how bad you are at meditating is a straightforward corollary/ˈkɔːrəleri/推论 of the axiom/ˈæksiəm/公理 that there’s no such thing as succeeding or failing at meditating. And if I’m violating the axiom, I might as well violate its corollary, so here goes.**
【刘福波：That you shouldn't talk about how bad you are at meditating is a straightforward corollary of the axiom that thert's no such thing as succeeding or failing at meditating.没有所谓成功和失败的冥想。这一条很重要。】

**Suppose you ranked排列 all the people in the world in terms of their likelihood可能 of picking up mindfulness正念减压法 meditation easily—sitting down, focusing on the breath, and slowly sinking下沉 into a state of calm, dispassionate/dɪsˈpæʃənət/不动感情的 observation. At one end of the spectrum/ˈspektrəm/普-范围 you’d have Bobby Knight鲍比·奈特—the college basketball coach famous for his red, furious face and for once flinging/ˈflɪŋɪŋ/抛 a chair onto a basketball court/kɔːrt/. At the other end you’d have, I don’t know, the Dalai Lama or maybe the late Mister Rogers. On this spectrum, I would be much closer to Bobby Knight than to the Dalai Lama or Mister Rogers. I’ve never thrown/θroʊn/ a chair onto a basketball court, but I threw a chicken leg at a dinner guest when I was four and a baseball棒球 bat/bæt/球棒 at a brother-in-law when I was twelve. Happily, my penchant/ˈpentʃənt/嗜好 for throwing/ˈθroʊɪŋ/ things at people has waned/weɪnd/减弱 with age, but the underlying作为…的原因 volatility/ˌvɑləˈtɪləti/波动 hasn’t entirely disappeared. And volatility doesn’t smooth/smuːð/抚平 the path路径 toward mindfulness正念.**

**Plus (and perhaps relatedly相关地) there’s my attitude toward other human beings, which could get in the way of the metta慈爱-巴利文, or loving-kindness, that you’re supposed to deploy调动 during a certain kind of meditation. Michael Kinsley迈克尔·金斯利, who was editor of the New Republic新共和国周刊 when I worked there many years ago, suggested, not even half-jokingly, that I should write a column/ˈkɑːləm/专栏 called “The Misanthrope/ˈmɪsənθroʊp/厌世者.”**

**Actually, I think that oversimplifies/ˌoʊvərˈsɪmplɪfaɪz/ my problem. I don’t have a hostile/ˈhɑːstl/怀有敌意的 disposition/ˌdɪspəˈzɪʃn/倾向 toward humankind per se本质上. In fact, I feel quite warmly toward humankind. It’s individual humans I have trouble with. I’m prone/proʊn/有做...的倾向 to a certain skepticism/ˈskeptɪsɪzəm/怀疑论 about people’s motives and character, and this critical appraisal/əˈpreɪzl/评价 can harden更严厉更硬 into enduringly持久地 harsh严厉的 judgment. I’m particularly尤其 tough on people who disagree with me on moral/ˈmɔːrəl/道德的 or political政治的 issues that I consider important. Once I place these people on the other side of a critical ideological/ˌaɪdiəˈlɑːdʒɪkl/思想体系的 boundary边界, I can have trouble thinking generous/ˈdʒenərəs/大方的 and sympathetic/ˌsɪmpəˈθetɪk/同情的 thoughts about them.**

**On top of all this, there’s my attention-deficit/ˈdefɪsɪt/缺少 disorder疾病.注意缺陷障碍 Meditation is hard enough even if you have normal skills of concentration/ˌkɑːnsnˈtreɪʃn/专心. I don’t.**

**Here’s an interesting thing about this hypothetical/ˌhaɪpəˈθetɪkl/假设的 spectrum/ˈspektrəm/范围 of people ranked排列 from most likely meditators to least likely meditators: the least likely meditators are the people who seem to most need the benefits益处 of meditation! Personally, I think that if the Dalai Lama had never started meditating, he’d still be a pretty easy guy to get along with. I don’t think he was born with a lot of rough edges小毛病 that needed sanding down打磨. So too with Mister Rogers. Bobby Knight and I are another story altogether完全.**

**Hence因此 another paradox/ˈpærədɑːks/悖论 of meditation: the problems that meditation can help you overcome often make it hard to meditate in the first place. Yes, meditation may help you lengthen/ˈleŋθən/延长 your attention span跨度, dampen/ˈdæmpən/抑制 your rage愤怒, and view your fellow human beings less judgmentally. Unfortunately, a short attention span, a hot temper, and a penchant/ˈpentʃənt/嗜好 for harsh严厉的 judgment may slow your progress along the meditative path路径. This is bad news for me.**

**But there’s an upside正面 to my possessing/pəˈzesɪŋ/拥有 this rich array/əˈreɪ/大量 of impediments/ɪmˈpɛdəmənts/障碍 to meditation. They make me a good laboratory rat, a kind of stand-in代替 for the rest of humankind. After all, even if I score/skɔːr/得分 higher on these scales/skeɪlz/范围 than the average平均的 person, most people score much higher on them than is optimal/ˈɑːptɪməl/最佳的. And it may well be that the average person scores higher on them than used to be the case. Technologies/tɛkˈnɑlədʒiz/ of distraction分散注意力 have made attention deficits/ˈdɛfɪsɪts/缺少 more common. And there’s something about the modern environment—something technological/ˌteknəˈlɑːdʒɪkl/技术的 or cultural or political or all of the above—that seems conducive/kənˈduːsɪv/有利于 to harsh严厉的 judgment and ready rage暴怒. Just look at all the tribalism/ˈtraɪbəlɪzəm/部落主义—the discord不一致 and even open conflict冲突 along religious/rɪˈlɪdʒəs/宗教冲突的, ethnic民族的, national, and ideological/ˌaɪdiəˈlɑːdʒɪkl/思想体系的 lines.思想路线 More and more, it seems, groups of people define their identity/aɪˈdentəti/身份 in terms of依据 sharp/ʃɑːrp/尖锐的 opposition反对 to other groups of people.**

**I consider this tribalism/ˈtraɪbəlɪzəm/部落主义 the biggest problem of our time. I think it could undo拆开 millennia/məˈlɛniə/千年 of movement toward global integration/ˌɪntɪˈɡreɪʃn/一体化, unravel/ʌnˈrævl/解体 the social web just when technology has brought the prospect/ˈprɑːspekt/展望 of a cohesive/koʊˈhiːsɪv/使凝聚的 planetary/ˈplænəteri/行星的 community within reach. Given that the world is still loaded with满载 nuclear weapons and that biotechnology/ˌbaɪoʊtekˈnɑːlədʒi/生物技术 is opening a Pandora’s box of new weaponry兵器, you can imagine our tribalistic部落的 impulses/ˈɪmpəlsɪz/冲击 ushering/ˈʌʃərɪŋ/把...引向 in a truly dark age.**

**Or maybe I’m getting carried away忘乎所以. Anyway, I’ll spare/sper/放过 you the full-length, high-volume/ˈvɑːljuːm/容量 version of my sermon/ˈsɜːrmən/布道 about our imperiled/ɪmˈperəld/危及 planet. You don’t have to share my apocalyptic/əˌpɑːkəˈlɪptɪk/似末日的 fears to think that it would be good for the world if meditation could help more people overcome the mental tendencies倾向 that sustain/səˈsteɪn/维持 the more belligerent/bəˈlɪdʒərənt/好战的 forms of tribalism/ˈtraɪbəlɪzəm/部落主义.  That’s what makes me such an exemplary模范的 laboratory rat. I am a walking embodiment/ɪmˈbɑːdimənt/体现 of what I consider to be the biggest problem facing humanity. I am, in microcosm/ˈmaɪkroʊkɑːzəm/缩影, what’s wrong with the world.**

**My career as a laboratory rat began in earnest认真的 when I went to that retreat疗养 in rural/ˈrʊrəl/乡村的 Massachusetts/ˌmæsəˈtʃusəts/马塞诸塞州 in August 2003. I had decided that meditation was worth exploring, but I had learned that casual/ˈkæʒuəl/随便的 experimentation/ɪkˌsperɪmenˈteɪʃn/实验 wouldn’t get a person like me very far. Boot camp训练营 was in order. So I signed up签约 for a seven-day retreat七天的静修 at the Insight Meditation Society内观禅修社, auspiciously/ɔs'pɪʃəslɪ/吉祥地 located on Pleasant Street in the town of Barre/ˈbɛri/巴尔. There, every day, I would do sitting meditation for a total of five and a half hours and walking meditation for about that long. As for the rest of the day, when you add three (silent) meals, a one-hour “yogi/ˈjoʊɡi/瑜伽师 job” in the morning (vacuuming/ˈvækjuːmɪŋ/吸尘 hallways走廊, in my case), and listening to one of the teachers give a “dharma/ˈdɑːrmə/佛法 talk” in the evening, you’ve pretty much exhausted/ɪɡˈzɔːstɪd/ the day.至于一天剩下的时间，当你加上三顿（无声的）饭，早上一个小时的“瑜珈工作”（我的例子是打扫走廊），晚上听一位老师讲“佛法”，你一整天都精疲力竭了。 Which is good, because if there was time you needed to waste, the traditional means of wasting it wouldn’t be available/əˈveɪləbl/可获得的. There was no TV, no internet, no news from the outside world. And you’re not supposed to bring books to read or do any writing. (That last rule I secretly broke so that I’d have a record of events. I wasn’t planning to write this book at that point, but I’m a writer, and I consider pretty much everything I do grist有利的事/面粉 for my mill磨坊/工厂.) And, of course, no talking.**
【刘福波：这是“打七”，是佛教禅宗的修行方法。202111231529】

**This daily regimen/ˈredʒɪmən/养生 may not sound taxing/ˈtæksɪŋ/费力的, since, aside from除了 the yogi job, it doesn’t involve涉及 anything we normally call work. But the first couple of days were pretty excruciating/ɪkˈskruːʃieɪtɪŋ/折磨人的. Have you ever tried sitting on a cushion/ˈkʊʃn/坐垫 with your legs crossed, focusing on your breath? It’s no picnic,不容易 especially if you’re as bad at focusing on your breath as I am. Early in the retreat, I could go a whole forty-five-minute meditation session课 without ever sustaining/səˈsteɪnɪŋ/维持 focus for ten consecutive/kənˈsekjətɪv/连续的 breaths. And I know, because I was counting! Time and again, after I counted three or four breaths, my mind would wander开小差, and then eventually最后 I’d realize that I had lost count—or, in some cases, that I was still going through the motions动作 of counting but was in fact thinking about something else and not consciously有意识地 feeling the breaths.**

**It didn’t help that I got mad at myself every time this happened—madder and madder as the first couple of days wore on慢慢地过去. Naturally, my anger then extended/ɪkˈstendɪd/延伸 to all the people who seemed to be doing better than I was. Which was around eighty people—that is, everybody. Imagine being stuck困于 for a week with eighty people who are doing better than you! People who succeed while you fail—or at least “succeed” while you “fail.”**

### My Big Breakthrough

My big breakthrough came on the fifth morning of the retreat. After breakfast I consumed/kənˈsuːmd/吃喝 a bit too much of the instant速溶的 coffee I had brought, and as I tried to meditate冥想 I felt the classic symptom/ˈsɪmptəm/症状 of overcaffeination: a very unpleasant tension/ˈtenʃn/紧张 in my jaw下巴 that made me feel like grinding/ˈɡraɪndɪŋ/磨 my teeth. This feeling kept intruding/ɪnˈtruːdɪŋ/打扰 on my focus, and, after trying for a while to fight the intrusion打扰, I finally just surrendered to it and shifted my attention to the tension in my jaw. Or maybe it wasn’t so much a shifting of attention as an expansion膨胀 of attention—staying conscious有意识的 of my breath but letting it recede退后 into the background as this annoying/əˈnɔɪɪŋ/烦人的 jaw sensation/senˈseɪʃn/感觉 moved to center stage.

This sort of readjustment/ˌriːəˈdʒʌstmənt/调整 of attention, by the way, is a perfectly fine thing to do. In mindfulness meditation as it’s typically典型的 taught, the point of focusing on your breath isn’t just to focus on your breath. It’s to stabilize your mind, to free it of its normal preoccupations/priˌɑkjəˈpeɪʃənz/专注 so you can observe things that are happening in a clear, unhurried从容不迫, less reactive反应性 way. And “things that are happening” emphatically/ɪmˈfætɪkli/强调 includes things happening inside your mind. Feelings arise within you—sadness, anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑, annoyance/əˈnɔɪəns/恼怒, relief轻松, joy—and you try to experience them from a different vantage/ˈvæntɪdʒ/优势 point than is usual, neither clinging/ˈklɪŋɪŋ/依附 to the good feelings nor running away from the bad ones, but rather just experiencing them straightforwardly直截了当 and observing them. This altered改变了的 perspective思考方法 can be the beginning of a fundamental基本的 and enduring持久的 change in your relationship to your feelings; you can, if all goes well, cease to停止 be their slave.

After devoting/dɪˈvoʊtɪŋ/投入 some attention to the overcaffeinated feeling in my jaw, I suddenly had an angle/ˈæŋɡl/角度 on my interior内部 life that I’d never had before. I remember thinking something like, “Yes, the grinding/ˈɡraɪndɪŋ/无休止 sensation感觉 is still there—the sensation I typically通常 define as unpleasant. But that sensation is down there in my jaw, and that’s not where I am. I’m up here in my head.” I was no longer identifying认同 with the feeling; I was viewing it objectively客观地, I guess you could say. In the space of a moment it had entirely lost its grip紧抓 on me. It was a very strange thing to have an unpleasant feeling cease to不再 be unpleasant without really going away.

There is a paradox/ˈpærədɑːks/悖论 here. (Don’t say I didn’t warn you!) When I first expanded扩大 my attention to encompass/ɪnˈkʌmpəs/包含 the obnoxiously/əbˈnɒkʃəslɪ/讨厌的 intrusive/ɪnˈtruːsɪv/侵入的 jaw-grinding/ˈɡraɪndɪŋ/无休止的 sensation感觉, this involved relaxing my resistance/rɪˈzɪstəns/反抗 to the sensation. I was, in a sense,从某种意义上说 accepting, even embracing拥抱 a feeling that I had been trying to keep at a distance. But the result of this closer proximity/prɑːkˈsɪməti/接近 to the feeling was to acquire获得 a kind of distance from it—a certain degree程度 of detachment/dɪˈtætʃmənt/超脱 (or, as some meditation teachers prefer更喜欢, for somewhat technical reasons,某种技术原因 to put it说实话, “nonattachment”/ˌnɒnəˈtætʃmənt/超脱性). This is something that can happen again and again via/ˈvaɪə/通过 meditation: accepting, even embracing, an unpleasant feeling can give you a critical distance from it that winds up diminishing/dɪˈmɪnɪʃɪŋ/减少 the unpleasantness.

In fact, one thing I occasionally/əˈkeɪʒnəli/偶尔地 do when I’m feeling very sad—and this is something you can experiment with even if you’ve never meditated/ˈmedɪteɪtɪd/冥想—is sit down, close my eyes, and study the sadness: accept its presence/ˈprezns/存在 and just observe how it actually makes me feel. For example, it’s kind of interesting that, though I may not be close to actually crying, the feeling of sadness does have a strong presence right around the parts of my eyes that would get active活跃的 if I did start crying. I’d never noticed that before meditating on sadness. This careful observation of sadness, combined/kəmˈbaɪnd/ with与…结合 a kind of acceptance/əkˈseptəns/接受 of it, does, in my experience, make it less unpleasant.

Now, here is a question that is fundamental/ˌfʌndəˈmentl/根本: Which, if either, of my two perceptions/pərˈsɛpʃənz/感知 was “truer真实的”—when the feeling felt unpleasant, or when the unpleasantness subsided/səbˈsaɪdɪd/平息 and the feeling became, for practical/ˈpræktɪkl/ purposes实际目的, neutral/ˈnuːtrəl/中立的? To put it another way: Was the initial/ɪˈnɪʃl/最初的 unpleasantness in any sense无论如何 an illusion/ɪˈluːʒn/幻觉? Certainly, by adopting/əˈdɑːptɪŋ/采取 another perspective/pərˈspektɪv/态度, I made it disappear—and that’s something that’s often true of what we call illusions: shifting your perspective/pərˈspektɪv/态度 dispels/dɪˈspelz/驱散 them. But are there any additional/əˈdɪʃənl/附加的 grounds/ɡraʊndz/理由 for thinking of it as an illusion?

This question goes way beyond my own little episodes/ˈɛpəˌsoʊdz/插曲 of transcending/trænˈsendɪŋ/超出 overcaffeination过度疲劳量 and melancholy/ˈmelənkɑːli/悲哀的. It applies/əˈplaɪz/, 它适用于in principle,从理论上说 to all negative feelings: fears, anxieties/æŋˈzaɪətiz/焦虑, loathing/ˈloʊðɪŋ/厌恶, self-loathing, and more. Imagine if our negative feelings, or at least lots of them, turned out to be illusions, and we could dispel/dɪˈspel/驱散 them by just contemplating/ˈkɑːntəmpleɪtɪŋ/沉思 them from a particular vantage/ˈvæntɪdʒ/优势 point.

### Pain That Doesn’t Hurt

There’s no doubt that meditation training has allowed some people to become essentially/ɪˈsenʃəli/本质上 indifferent/ɪnˈdɪfrənt/漠不关心的 to what otherwise/ˈʌðərwaɪz/之外 would have been unbearable/ʌnˈberəbl/无法忍受的 pain. In June of 1963 a monk和尚 named Thich Quang Duc staged上演 a public protest抗议 of the South Vietnamese/viɛtnɑˈmis/ government’s treatment of Buddhists. On a cushion/ˈkʊʃn/软垫 placed in a Saigon street, he assumed/əˈsuːmd/呈现 the lotus/ˈloʊtəs/莲花 position. After another monk poured/pɔːrd/倾倒 gasoline/ˈɡæsəliːn/汽油 over him, Duc said, “Before closing my eyes and moving towards the vision of the Buddha, I respectfully plead乞求 to President Ngo Dinh Diem to take a mind of compassion/kəmˈpæʃn/同情 towards the people of the nation and implement/ˈɪmplɪmənt/使生效 religious/rɪˈlɪdʒəs/宗教的 equality/iˈkwɑːləti/平等 to maintain/meɪnˈteɪn/维持 the strength of the homeland eternally/ɪˈtɜrnəli/永久的.” Then he lit a match. The journalist/ˈdʒɜːrnəlɪst/新闻工作者 David Halberstam哈伯斯塔姆, who witnessed/ˈwɪtnəst/见证 the event, wrote, “As he burned he never moved a muscle, never uttered/ˈʌtərd/说出 a sound, his outward/ˈaʊtwərd/表面的 composure/kəmˈpoʊʒər/镇定 in sharp鲜明的 contrast/ˈkɑːntræst , kənˈtræst/对比 to the wailing/ˈweɪlɪŋ/哀嚎 people around him.”

Now, you might argue that Duc, far from liberating/ˈlɪbəreɪtɪŋ/解放 himself from an illusion, was actually suffering from an illusion. After all, the fact is that he was burning to death. So if he lacked the sensation/senˈseɪʃn/感觉 we normally associate联想 with burning to death—a sensation that carries intense强烈的 pain and triggers alarm that would strike/straɪk/击-罢工 most of us as appropriate适当的—then isn’t there some sense in which he wasn’t getting the picture?那么，他不明白这是怎么回事吗？

The question I’m circling around—which of our “normal” feelings, thoughts, and perceptions/pərˈsɛpʃənz/感知 are in some sense illusions—is important for two reasons. One reason is simple and practical/ˈpræktɪkl/实际的: obviously, if many unpleasant feelings—feelings of anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑, fear, self-loathing厌恶, melancholy/ˈmelənkɑːli/忧郁的, and so on—are in some sense illusions, and we can use meditation冥想 to dispel/dɪˈspel/驱散 them or at least weaken their grip控制 on us, that’s news you can use. The other reason is at first glance/ɡlæns/一瞥 more academic/ˌækəˈdemɪk/学术的, but it ultimately/ˈʌltɪmətli/根本上 has a kind of practical/ˈpræktɪkl/实际的 value as well. Figuring out when our feelings mislead us will help shed light on将…弄明白 the question of whether the Buddhist view of the mind, and of the mind’s relationship to reality, is as crazy as it sometimes sounds. Is perceived/pərˈsiːvd/感知到 reality, or a sizable/ˈsaɪzəbəl/可观的 chunk大块 of it, really an illusion?

This question takes us into depths of Buddhist philosophy that aren’t often plumbed/plʌmd/探究 in popular accounts of通俗地说 meditation. Naturally enough, these accounts账目 tend to focus on things with a near-term近期 payoff—stress支付压力 reduction减少, boosting/ˈbuːstɪŋ/促进 self-esteem自尊, and so on—without getting deeply into the philosophical/ˌfɪləˈsɑːfɪkl/哲学的 context/ˈkɑːntekst/环境背景 in which Buddhist meditation arose/əˈroʊz/出现 and within which it has flourished/ˈflɜːrɪʃt/繁荣. Using meditation this way, as a purely therapeutic/ˌθerəˈpjuːtɪk/治疗的 device方法 that doesn’t deeply change your view of reality, is a perfectly fine thing to do. It’s good for you, and it will probably be good for the world.

Still, using meditation this way isn’t, by itself, taking the red pill. Taking the red pill means asking basic questions about the relationship of the perceiver感知者 to the perceived/pərˈsiːvd/感知 and examining the underpinnings基础 of our normal view of reality. If you’re thinking seriously about taking the red pill, you’ll be curious as to whether the Buddhist view of the world “works” not just in a therapeutic/ˌθerəˈpjuːtɪk/治疗的 sense but in a more philosophical/ˌfɪləˈsɑːfɪkl/ sense. Does this Buddhist perspective/pərˈspektɪv/态度, with its seemingly/ˈsiːmɪŋli/看似 topsy-turvy/ˌtɑːpsi ˈtɜːrvi/杂乱无章的 conception/kənˈsepʃn/构思 of what’s real and what’s not, make any sense in light of按照 modern science? That’s the question I’ll take up in the next chapter—and, indeed, in much of the rest of this book. As we’ll see, this question, though important on sheerly 纯粹的 philosophical/ˌfɪləˈsɑːfɪkl/哲学的 grounds,哲学基础 also has implications/ˌɪmpləˈkeɪʃənz/启示 for how we live our lives—implications that, though in a sense从某种意义上说 practical切实可行的, are probably better described as “spiritual/ˈspɪrɪtʃuəl/” than as “therapeutic/ˌθerəˈpjuːtɪk/治疗的.”

But first a word of caution. Strictly/ˈstrɪktli/严格的 speaking, there is no “Buddhist view of the world.” Buddhism began to split/splɪt/分裂 into different schools of各派 interpretation/ɪnˌtɜːrprəˈteɪʃn/演绎 not long after it arose出现, around the middle of the first millennium/mɪˈleniəm/千年 BCE公元前. As a result, just as there are Catholic/ˈkæθlɪk/天主教的 and Protestant/ˈprɑːtɪstənt/新教的 Christians/ˈkrɪstʃənz/基督徒 and Sunni/ˈsʊni/逊尼派 and Shia/ˈʃiːə/什叶派 Muslims/ˈmʌzləmz/穆斯林, there are distinct/dɪˈstɪŋkt/不同的 branches of Buddhist thought that differ/ˈdɪfər/相异 on particular特定的 points of doctrine/ˈdɑːktrɪn/教条.因此，正如天主教和新教基督徒以及逊尼派和什叶派穆斯林一样，佛教思想也有不同的分支，在特定的教义点上存在差异。

{Before the Christian Era/ˈɪrə/纪元}

The most basic division分歧 in Buddhism is between the Theravada/ˌθerəˈvɑːdə/小乘 school and the Mahayana/ˌmɑːhəˈjɑːnə/ school. My own meditative沉思的 tradition, Vipassana内观。, derives/dɪˈraɪvz/起源 from the Theravada lineage /ˈlɪnɪɪdʒ/血统. It is within the Mahayana lineage (to which Quang Duc广德 belonged) that you find the most radically/ˈrædɪkli/根本的 broad宽阔的 conception构思 of illusion. Some Mahayana Buddhists even subscribe/səbˈskraɪb/ to同意 a “mind-only”唯心 doctrine/ˈdɑːktrɪn/教义 that, in its more extreme极端 incarnations化身, dismisses摒除 the things we “perceive感知” via/ˈvaɪə/通过 consciousness清醒状态 as, pretty相当 literally/ˈlɪtərəli/简直, figments/ˈfɪgmɪnts/虚构 of our imagination. This strand方面 of Buddhist thought—the strand that most obviously resonates共鸣 with the movie The Matrix—isn’t dominant/ˈdɑːmɪnənt/占主导地位 within Mahayana Buddhism, much less within Buddhism at large大多数. But even mainstream主流 Buddhist thinkers accept some version of the concept概念 of emptiness/ˈemptinəs/空, a subtle/ˈsʌtl/微妙 idea that is hard to capture捕获 in a few words (or in many words) but certainly holds,但确实如此 at a minimum/ˈmɪnɪməm/最小值, that the things we see when we look out on the world have less in the way of distinct明显的 and substantial本质 existence性体存在 than they seem to have.但是，即使是主流佛教思想家也接受空的概念的某些版本，这是一个很难用几句话（或许多话）来表达的微妙想法，但至少可以肯定的是，我们观察世界时所看到的事物，其独特和实质性的存在方式要比它们看起来的少。

And then there is the famous Buddhist idea that the self—you know, your self, my self—is an illusion. In this view, the “you” that you think of as thinking your thoughts, feeling your feelings, and making your decisions doesn’t really exist.
{In Mahayana Buddhism, for reasons I’ll touch on涉及 in chapter 13, the term emptiness is often taken to include the concept概念 of not-self. But in Theravada Buddhism, not-self非自性 is typically/ˈtɪpɪkli/通常 treated看作 separately/ˈseprətli/分别地 from any broader宽广的 notion概念 of emptiness (a notion that is less prominent/ˈprɑːmɪnənt/重要 in Theravada thinking anyway). Throughout this book, I use the terms not-self and emptiness in a nonoverlapping/ˌnɒnəʊvəˈlæpɪŋ/不重叠的 way; emptiness will be used more narrowly/ˈnæroʊli/狭隘地 than in the Mahayana tradition, referring/rɪˈfɜːrɪŋ/指 only to the world “out there.”}

If you put these two fundamental/ˌfʌndəˈmentl/根本的 Buddhist ideas together—the idea of not-self and the idea of emptiness—you have a radical不同凡响的 proposition主张: neither the world inside you nor the world outside you is anything like it seems.

Both of these ideas would strike撞击 most people as dubious/ˈduːbiəs/怀疑, if not crazy. Then again, since the premise/ˈpremɪs/前提 of these ideas is that people are naturally deluded/dɪˈluːdɪd/迷惑, it would seem perverse不通情理的 to let people’s natural reactions to them keep us from exploring them. This book is in no small part在很大程度上 an exploration of these two ideas, and what I hope to show is that they make a lot of sense. Both our natural view of the world “out there” and our natural view of the world “in here”—the world inside our heads—are deeply misleading. What’s more, failing to see these two worlds clearly does lead, as Buddhism holds, to a lot of suffering. And meditation can help us see them more clearly.

When I say we’re going to be exploring the scientific foundation基本原理 of a Buddhist worldview, I don’t mean “scientific foundation” in the sense of scientific evidence that meditation can reduce减少 suffering. If you want such evidence, there are lots of studies, readily available现成的 and widely reported, that seem to show as much. And I don’t mean “scientific foundation” only in the sense of what’s going on in the brain when you’re meditating and starting to change your view of reality—though I will, to be sure, get into some of the more important brain-scan studies.

I mean “scientific foundation” in the sense of using all the tools of modern psychology to look at such questions as these: Why, and in what particular ways, are human beings naturally deluded/dɪˈluːdɪd/迷惑? How exactly does the delusion work? How does delusion make us suffer? How does it make us make other people suffer? Why would the Buddhist prescription/prɪˈskrɪpʃn/处方 for dispelling/dɪˈspelɪŋ/消除 the delusion—in particular尤其, the meditative part of that prescription—work? And what would it mean for it to work fully/ˈfʊli/充分的? In other words, does the elusive/iˈluːsɪv/ state难以捉摸的状态 that is said to lie at the culmination/ˌkʌlmɪˈneɪʃn/顶点 of the meditative path路径—sometimes called enlightenment启发—really qualify具有资格 for that term措辞? What would it be like to see the world with perfect clarity/ˈklærəti/清晰?

And speaking of the world: Is saving the world—keeping the psychology of tribalism/ˈtraɪbəlɪzəm/部落主义 from covering the planet in chaos/ˈkeɪɑːs/混乱 and bloodshed/ˈblʌdʃed/流血—really a matter of just clarifying澄清 the vision of the world’s people? I shouldn’t say “just,” because, obviously, if delusion错觉 is deeply ingrained/ɪnˈɡreɪnd/根深蒂固的 in us, then dispelling消除 it will take work. Still, it would be nice to know if the struggle for enduring/ɪnˈdʊrɪŋ/持久的 peace is also the struggle for truth; as long as we’re undertaking承担 a task as Herculean/ˌhɜːrkjuˈliːən/艰巨的 as saving the world, it would be great to kill two birds with one stone! It would also be nice to think that when people pursue/pərˈsuː/追求 the path路径 to liberation/ˌlɪbəˈreɪʃən/解放—use meditation to try and see the world more clearly, and in the process reduce减少 their suffering—they are helping humanity broadly, that the quest探索 for individual个人 salvation/sælˈveɪʃn/拯救 advances进展 the quest for social salvation.

The first step in this epic/ˈepɪk/宏大的 inquiry/ˈɪnkwəri/调查 is to take a closer look at our feelings: pain, pleasure, fear, anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑, love, lust渴望, and so on. Feelings play a very big role in shaping our perceptions感知 and guiding us through life—bigger than most people realize. Are they reliable可靠的 guides? That’s a question we’ll start to examine in the next chapter.

## 3 When Are Feelings Illusions幻想?

Hovering/ˈhʌvərɪŋ/徘徊 over the question posed by the title of this chapter is a larger question: What the hell are we talking about here? Illusions are things that seem to be true but aren’t—and what would it even mean to say that feelings are “true” or “false”? Feelings just are. If we feel them, then they’re feelings—real feelings, not imagined feelings. End of story.

There’s something to be said for this point of view. In fact, one of the take-home lessons of Buddhist philosophy is that feelings just are. If we accepted their arising产生 and subsiding/səbˈsaɪdɪŋ/消退 as part of life, rather than reacting to them as if they were deeply meaningful, we’d often be better off. Learning to do that is a big part of what mindfulness meditation is about. And there are lots of satisfied customers who attest/əˈtest/证实 that it works.

Still, saying that it works isn’t the same as saying that it’s intellectually智力上地 valid合理的. Just because being less reactive to some of your feelings makes you happier doesn’t mean it brings a truer/ˈtruər/真正的 apprehension忧虑 of the world. Maybe this less reactive stance/stæns/立场 is like a narcotic/nɑːrˈkɑːtɪk/致幻剂: it dulls/dʌlz/减轻麻醉 the pain by insulating/ˈɪnsəleɪtɪŋ/使隔绝 you from the real-world feedback/ˈfiːdbæk/反馈 that your feelings provide. Maybe it’s meditation, not your ordinary consciousness,普通意识 that puts you in a dream world.

If we want to see whether meditation does, in fact, bring you closer to the truth, it helps to ask whether some of the feelings it can liberate you from would otherwise have carried you away from the truth. So we need to try to get a handle on掌握 this admittedly/ədˈmɪtɪdli/诚然 unwieldy/ʌnˈwiːldi/笨手笨脚的 question: Are our feelings in some sense “false”? Or “true”? Are some false and some true? And which are which?

One way to approach/əˈproʊtʃ/接近 these questions is to go back in evolutionary/ˌiːvəˈluːʃəneri/进化 time. Way back. Back to when feelings first arose出现. Sadly, no one knows exactly when that was, or even approximately/əˈprɑːksɪmətli/大约 when that was. Was it back when mammals/ˈmæməlz/哺乳动物 appeared? Reptiles/ˈrɛptaɪlz/爬行动物? Squishy/ˈskwɪʃi/黏糊糊 blobs/blɑbz/一点 floating in the sea? One-celled creatures such as bacteria/bækˈtɪriə/细菌?解决这些问题的一种方法是回到进化时代。很久以前。回到最初的感觉。可悲的是，没有人确切地知道那是什么时候，甚至没有人知道那大约是什么时候。是哺乳动物出现的时候吗？爬行动物？漂浮在海里的粘糊糊的水滴？单细胞生物，比如细菌？

One reason it’s hard to say is that feelings have an odd/ɑːd/古怪的 property/ˈprɑː.pɚ.t̬i/特性: you can never be absolutely, positively/ˈpɑːzətɪvli/绝对地 sure that anyone or anything other than you has them. Part of the definition/ˌdefɪˈnɪʃn/释义 of a feeling is that it’s private, not visible from the outside. So I don’t know for sure that, say, my dog Frazier弗雷泽 has feelings. Maybe that wagging/ˈwæɡɪŋ/摇摆 tail/teɪl/ is just a wagging tail!

But just as I seriously doubt that I’m the only human with feelings, I seriously doubt that my species/ˈspiːʃiːz/物种 is the only species with feelings. I suspect/səˈspekt , ˈsʌspekt/怀疑 that when my cousin the chimpanzee/ˌtʃɪmpænˈziː/黑猩猩 writhes/raɪðz/扭动 in seeming/ˈsiːmɪŋ/看似 pain, it is writhing/ˈraɪðɪŋ/扭动 in actual pain. And if, from chimpanzees, you go down the ladder/ˈlædər/梯子 of behavioral/bɪ'heɪvjərəl/关于行为的 complexity复杂性—down to wolves, lizards/ˈlɪzərdz/蜥蜴, even jellyfish/ˈdʒelifɪʃ/水母, and (what the hell) bacteria/bækˈtɪriə/细菌—I don’t see an obvious place to stop assuming/əˈsuːmɪŋ/假设 that there are feelings.我怀疑，当我的表弟黑猩猩在表面上痛苦地扭动时，它实际上是在痛苦中扭动。如果你从黑猩猩的行为复杂性的阶梯上走到狼，蜥蜴，甚至水母，还有（该死的）细菌——我看不出有什么明显的地方可以停止假设有感觉。

Anyway, regardless无论 of when feelings first arose出现, there is a rough粗糙的 consensus/kənˈsensəs/共识 among behavioral/bɪ'heɪvjərəl/关于行为的 scientists on what the original/əˈrɪdʒənl/起初的 function功能 of good feelings and bad feelings was: to get organisms/ˈɔrgəˌnɪzəmz/有机体 to approach靠近 things or avoid things that are, respectively分别地, good for them or bad for them. Nutrients/ˈnutriənts/营养物, for example, keep organisms alive, so natural selection favored青睐 genes that gave organisms feelings that led them to approach things containing包含 nutrients—that is, food. (You may be familiar with such feelings.) Things that harm or kill organisms, in contrast相反, are best avoided, so natural selection gave organisms feelings that inclined/ɪnˈklaɪnd/倾向于 them to avoid such things—feelings of aversion/əˈvɜːrʒn/厌恶. To approach or to avoid is the most elemental/ˌelɪˈmentl/基本的 behavioral decision there is, and feelings seem to be the tool natural selection used to get organisms to make what, by natural selection’s lights, was the right decision.

After all, your average普通的 animal isn’t smart enough to think, “Hmm, that substance物质 is rich in carbohydrates/ˌkɑrboʊˈhaɪdreɪts/碳水, which give me energy, so I’ll make a habit of approaching and ingesting/ɪnˈdʒestɪŋ/进食 it.” In fact, your average animal isn’t even smart enough to think, “Food good for me, so I approach.” Feelings arose as proxies代表 for this kind of thinking. The inviting/ɪnˈvaɪtɪŋ/吸引的 warmth/wɔːrmθ/温暖 of a campfire/ˈkæmpfaɪər/篝火 on a freezing night means that staying warm is better for us than freezing. The pain caused by actual contact with the fire means that there’s such a thing as too much warmth. The job of these and other feelings is to convey表达 to the organism有机体 what’s good for it and what’s bad for it. As the biologist/baɪˈɑːlədʒɪst/生物学家 George Romanes乔治·罗曼斯 put it in 1884, twenty-five years after Darwin’s The Origin of Species物种起源 appeared, “Pleasures and pains must have been evolved as the subjective主观的 accompaniment伴随发生的事情 of processes/ˈprɑːsesɪz , prəˈsesɪz/过程 which are respectively分别地 beneficial有益的 or injurious/ɪnˈdʒʊriəs/有害的 to the organism, and so evolved for the purpose or to the end that the organism should seek the one and shun回避 the other.”

This suggests one way to think about whether feelings are true or false. Feelings are designed to encode judgments about things in our environment. Typically/ˈtɪpɪkli/一般 these judgments are about whether these things are good or bad for the survival of the organism有机体 doing the feeling (though sometimes they’re about whether these things are good or bad for close kin同类的—notably/ˈnoʊtəbli/尤其是 offspring子女—since close kin share so many of our genes). So we could say that feelings are “true” if the judgments they encode are accurate/ˈækjərət/准确的—if, say, the things they attract吸引 the organism to are indeed的确 good for it, or if the things they encourage the organism to avoid are indeed bad for it. We could say feelings are “false” or perhaps “illusory虚幻的” if they lead the organism astray不对头的—if following the feelings leads to things that are bad for the organism.

{Some philosophers hold the view that, actually, feelings never cause organisms to do anything. The underlying基本 idea here, called “epiphenomenalism/ˌɛpɪfɪˈnɒmɪnəˌlɪzəm/副现象论,” is that subjective主观的 experience is influenced by the physical workings of the organism but never influences those workings. If the epiphenomenalist view is correct, then the way I’ve described the primordial/praɪˈmɔːrdiəl/原始的 function of feelings情感的功能—to get organisms to approach/avoid things that are good/bad for them—can’t be, strictly/ˈstrɪktli/确切地 speaking, right. (Indeed, in the epiphenomenalist view, the existence存在 of feelings is something of a mystery神秘, because they have no apparent显然的 function.) But even if so, it’s fair to say that, for example, unpleasant feelings accompany伴随 behaviors that get organisms to avoid things that are bad for them, and thus因此 signify/ˈsɪɡnɪfaɪ/表示 that in natural selection’s “view,” aversion厌恶 is appropriate适当的. In that sense the meaning of feelings is essentially/ɪˈsenʃəli/本质上 the same in the epiphenomenalist/ˌɛpɪfɪˈnɒmɪnəˌlɪst/ view of consciousness觉察 as in other views of consciousness. And, by the way, if the epiphenomenalist view is correct, then much of what behavioral scientists say about feelings—stating陈述 or implying暗示, as it does, that feelings have functionality/ˌfʌŋkʃəˈnæləti/功能—is, strictly严格地 speaking, not accurate/ˈækjərət/准确的. So, strictly speaking, the behavioral sciences literature/ˈlɪtrətʃər/著作 should be littered乱扔 with disclaimers/dɪˈskleɪmərz/免责声明 of the kind I’m making here. But, again, such disclaimers tend not to fundamentally/ˌfʌndəˈmentəli/根本 undermine/ˌʌndərˈmaɪn/破坏 the accompanying伴随着 analysis分析.}

This isn’t the only way you could define true and false in a biological context背景, but it’s one approach方法, so let’s see how far we get with it.

### Obsolete/ˌɑːbsəˈliːt/过时的; Urges冲动

Take powdered抹粉-sugar doughnuts/ˈdoʊˌnʌts/甜甜圈. I personally have very warm feelings toward them—so warm that, if I were guided only by my feelings, I would eat them for breakfast, lunch, dinner, and between-meal snacks点心. Yet I’m told that, actually, eating that many doughnuts each day would be bad for me. So I guess my feeling of attraction to powdered-sugar doughnuts could be called false: these doughnuts feel good, but this is an illusion because they’re not really good for me. This is of course hard news to take; it calls to mind the plaintive/ˈpleɪntɪv/悲伤的 lyrics/ˈlɪrɪks/歌词 of that old Luther Ingram song: “If loving you is wrong, I don’t want to be right.”

It also calls to mind a question: How could natural selection let something like this happen? Shouldn’t our feelings direct us toward things that are good for the organism? They should, yes. But here’s the thing: natural selection designed our feelings in a particular environment—an environment with no junk food垃圾食品, an environment in which the sweetest thing available was fruit. So a sweet tooth served us well; it gave us feelings that, you might say, were “true” in the sense that they steered/stɪrd/引导 us toward things that were good for us. But in a modern environment, which features/ˈfiːtʃərz/以...为特色 the achievement of culinary/ˈkʌlɪneri/烹饪的 science known as “empty calories/ˈkæləriz/卡路里,” these feelings become “false,” or at least not reliably可靠的 true; they sometimes tell us something is good when it’s not good for us.

There are quite a few feelings like this—feelings that, back when they entered our lineage/ˈlɪniɪdʒ/血统, served our ancestors’ interests but that don’t always serve our interests now. Take road rage.公路暴怒 The desire to punish people who treat you unfairly or show you disrespect is deeply human. And admit it: though there’s something unpleasant about being made angry, there’s something pleasing about the feeling of anger itself—the feeling that you’re rightfully正当的 enraged激怒. The Buddha said anger has a “poisoned root and honeyed tip.”毒根蜜尖

And you can see why natural selection would have made righteous/ˈraɪtʃəs/正当的 rage愤怒 attractive令人愉快的: in a small hunter-gatherer/ˈɡæðərər/采集者 village, if someone took advantage of you占你的便宜—stole your food, stole your mate伴侣, or just generally/ˈdʒenrəli/一般的 treated you like dirt垃圾—you needed to teach him a lesson. After all, if he learns he can get away with abusing伤害 you, he may do it again and again. Worse still, others in your social universe will see that you can be thus如此 exploited/ɪkˈsplɔɪtɪd/剥削, so they may start treating you badly. In such an intimate亲密的, unchanging social environment, it would be worth your while to get so angry over exploitation剥削 that you would confront/kənˈfrʌnt/直面 your exploiter剥削者 and be willing to come to blows/bloʊz/打击. Even if you lost the fight—even if you got battered重创的 pretty badly—you’d have sent the message that there’s a cost for disrespecting you, and this message would pay dividends/ˈdɪvəˌdɛndz/红利 over time.

You may already be pondering/ˈpɑːndərɪŋ/思考 the absurdity/əbˈsɜrdəti/荒谬 of the way this feeling can play out发生 on a modern highway. The disrespectful无礼的 driver you feel like punishing is someone you’ll never see again, and so are all the drivers who might witness/ˈwɪtnəs/见证 any revenge you wreak/riːk/造成【刘福波：类似*维克*的发音。】. So there’s no benefit/ˈbenɪfɪt/好处 whatsoever/ˌhwɑtsoʊ'evər/不管怎样 that comes from indulging/ɪnˈdʌldʒɪŋ/纵容 your rage. As for the cost: I’d guess that chasing/ˈtʃeɪsɪŋ/追逐 somebody in a car at eighty miles per hour is more likely to get you killed than was starting a fistfight in a hunter-gatherer society.

So you could call road rage “false.” It feels good, but the aura/ˈɔːrə/氛围 of goodness is illusory/ɪˈluːsəri/虚幻的, because succumbing/səˈkʌmɪŋ/屈服 to its attraction/əˈtrækʃn/吸引力 leads to behavior that will not, on average, 平均而言be good for the organism.

There are lots of instances/ˈɪnstənsɪz/例子 of off-road rage as well that are “false”—bursts/bɜːrsts/爆发 of anger that are at best充其量 unproductive无益的 and at worst最坏的情况 counterproductive适得其反. So if meditation did liberate you from obedience/oʊˈbidiəns/服从 to these feelings, it would be, in a certain sense,在某种意义上 dispelling an illusion—the illusion you implicitly/ɪmˈplɪsətli/暗中地 subscribe/səbˈskraɪb/ to同意 when you follow the feeling, the illusion that the rage, and for that matter the revenge it inspires/ɪnˈspaɪərz/激发, is fundamentally/ˌfʌndəˈmentəli/从根本上讲 “good.” It turns out the feeling isn’t even good in the basic sense of self-interest.事实证明，从基本的自利角度来看，这种感觉甚至都不好。

So that’s one way to define true and false as they apply to适用于 feelings: if they feel good but lead us to do things that aren’t really good for us, then they’re false feelings. But there’s another sense in which feelings can be true or false. Some feelings, after all, are more than feelings; they don’t just imply表明 judgments about whether doing certain things will be good for the organism; they come with actual, explicit/ɪkˈsplɪsɪt/明确的 beliefs about things in the environment and how they relate to the organism’s welfare/ˈwelfer/福利. Obviously, such beliefs can be true or false in a pretty相当 straightforward直截了当 sense.

### False Positives假阳性

Suppose you’re hiking/ˈhaɪkɪŋ/徒步旅行 through what you know to be rattlesnake/ˈrætlsneɪk/响尾蛇 terrain/təˈreɪn/地带, and suppose you know that only a year ago, someone hiking alone in this vicinity/vəˈsɪnəti/附近 was bitten by a rattlesnake and died. Now suppose there’s a stirring/ˈstɜːrɪŋ/搅动 in the brush刷子 next to your feet. This stirring doesn’t just give you a surge of激增 fear; you feel the fear that there is a rattlesnake near you. In fact, as you turn quickly toward the disturbance/dɪˈstɜːrbəns/骚乱 and your fear reaches its apex/ˈeɪpeks/顶点, you may be so clearly envisioning/ɪnˈvɪʒnɪŋ/设想 a rattlesnake that, if the culprit/ˈkʌlprɪt/罪魁祸首 turns out to be a lizard蜥蜴, there will be a fraction of a second几分之一秒 when the lizard looks like a snake. This is an illusion in a literal字面意义 sense: you actually believe there is something there that isn’t there; in fact, you actually “see” it.

These kinds of misperceptions无解 are known as “false positives”; from natural selection’s point of view, they’re a feature/ˈfiːtʃər/特性, not a bug. Though your brief短暂的 conviction信念 that you’ve seen a rattlesnake may be wrong ninety-nine times out of a hundred, the conviction could be lifesaving the other one time in a hundred. And in natural selection’s calculus/ˈkælkjələs/微积分或演算, being right 1 percent of the time in matters of life or death can be worth being wrong 99 percent of the time, even if in every one of those ninety-nine instances/ˈɪnstənsɪz/实例 you’re briefly/ˈbriːfli/短暂地 terrified极度惊恐的.

So there are actually two differences between the snake illusion, on the one hand, and the doughnut/ˈdoʊnʌt/甜甜圈 and road rage illusions, on the other: (1) in the case of the snake, the illusion is explicit/ɪkˈsplɪsɪt/明确的—it’s an actual false perception/pərˈsepʃn/知觉 about the physical物理的 world and, for a moment, a false belief; (2) in the case of the snake, your emotional machinery/məˈʃiːnəri/机械 is working exactly as designed. In other words, the snake illusion isn’t a result of “environmental mismatch/ˌmɪsˈmætʃ , ˈmɪsmætʃ/误配”; it’s not a case where a feeling designed by natural selection to be in some sense “true” in a hunter-gatherer environment was rendered/ˈrendərd/呈现 “false” by circumstances/ˈsɜrkəmˌstænsəz , ˈsɜrkəmˌstænsɪz/环境 of modern life. Rather, natural selection designed this feeling to be almost always illusory/ɪˈluːsəri/虚幻的 in a literal/ˈlɪtərəl/字面意义的 sense; the feeling fills you with a conviction/kənˈvɪkʃn/信念—a judgment about what’s in your immediate/ɪˈmiːdiət/当前的 environment—that is pretty reliably/rɪ'laɪəbli/可靠地 untrue. This is a reminder/rɪˈmaɪndər/提醒 that natural selection didn’t design your mind to see the world clearly; it designed your mind to have perceptions/pərˈsɛpʃənz/感知 and beliefs that would help take care of your genes.

Which brings us to a third difference between the doughnut and road rage illusions and the snake illusion: the snake illusion, in the long run, may well be good for you; it may keep you safe from harm that would otherwise/ˈʌðərwaɪz/否则 befall/bɪˈfɔːl/降临 you. The same goes for comparable/ˈkɑːmpərəbl/可比较的 illusions that, depending on where you live, might be more likely to visit you than a snake illusion. You might, while walking home at night, fear that the footsteps behind you belong to a mugger/ˈmʌɡər/抢劫犯; and, though you’re probably wrong, crossing the street is a precaution/prɪˈkɔːʃn/预防措施 that, over the course of your whole life, may prevent a crime that otherwise would have victimized/ˈvɪktɪmaɪzd/使受苦 you.

I have a fear that all this may be sounding more clear-cut一目了然的 than it is. It may seem as if there are two kinds of false feelings—the unnatural, “environmental mismatch误配” kind and the natural, “false positive” kind—and you should always ignore the former前者, whereas/ˌwerˈæz/鉴于 obeying服从 the latter makes sense. In the real world, it turns out, these lines can get blurry/ˈblɜːri/模糊的.

For example: Have you ever been visited by the fear that something you said to someone had offended/əˈfendɪd/冒犯 her? And has this person ever been someone you weren’t going to see for a while? And has it been the case that, because you didn’t know her very well, it would have been awkward/ˈɔːkwərd/令人尴尬的 to call her or send her an email to make sure you hadn’t offended her or to clarify/ˈklærəfaɪ/澄清 that no offense/əˈfens/冒犯 was meant?

The feeling itself—the concern that you’ve offended someone—is perfectly natural; staying on good terms with people boosted/ˈbuːstɪd/促进 our ancestors’ chances of surviving and reproducing繁殖. Also natural, perhaps, is the fact that in some cases you’re exaggerating/ɪɡˈzædʒəreɪtɪŋ/夸大 the chances that you’ve offended the person, even feeling bursts爆发 of一阵 certainty that you’ve done so. This may be another one of nature’s false positives/ˈpɑzətɪvz/阳性结果; the sense that you’ve erred出错 may be “designed” to be so powerful that you’ll take remedial/rɪˈmiːdiəl/不就的 action more often than it’s really called for.

What’s not natural is that remedial action is so hard to take. In a hunter-gatherer village, the person you feared you’d offended would live, oh, fifty feet away from you and you’d see her again in, oh, twenty minutes or so. At that point you could gauge/ɡeɪdʒ/估算判定 her demeanor/dɪˈminər/态度举止 and perhaps be reassured/ˌriːəˈʃʊrd/使安心 that no offense was taken or conclude/kənˈkluːd/断定 that she was in fact miffed/mɪft/有点恼火 and try to rectify/ˈrektɪfaɪ/纠正 the situation.

In other words, the initial/ɪˈnɪʃl/最初的 feeling—even if illusory/ɪˈluːsəri/虚幻的—is probably natural, designed to appear on occasions/əˈkeɪʒnz/使发生 like this. What’s not natural are features/ˈfiːtʃərz/特征 of the modern world that make it hard to find out whether the feeling was or wasn’t an illusion. So the feeling lasts longer than is likely to be of any practical/ˈpræktɪkl/实际的 value. And, unfortunately, the feeling is unpleasant.

Another unpleasant product of environmental mismatch环境错配 is painful self-consciousness/ˈkɑːnʃəsnəs/感觉意识观念. We’re designed by natural selection to care—and care a lot—about what other people think of us. During evolution, people who were liked, admired/ədˈmaɪərd/钦佩, and respected would have been more effective gene propagators/prɑːpəɡeɪtərz/传播者 than people who were the opposite. But in a hunter-gatherer village, your neighbors would have had a vast巨大的大量的 database/ˈdeɪtəbeɪs/数据库 on your behavior, so you’d be unlikely, on any given day,在任何一天 to do anything that radically/ˈrædɪkli/彻底的 revised/rɪˈvaɪzd/改变的 their opinion of you, for better or worse. Social encounters/ɪnˈkaʊntərz/相遇 wouldn’t typically/ˈtɪpɪkli/典型的通常 have been high-pressure/ˌhaɪ ˈpreʃər/高压的非常紧张的 events.

In the modern world, we often find ourselves in the unnatural position of meeting someone who knows little or nothing about us. That can add a little pressure to the occasion/əˈkeɪʒn/场合, and it may add more if your mother was prone/proʊn/有做...的倾向 to saying “You get only one chance to make a good first impression印象!” You may find yourself scanning/ˈskænɪŋ/细查扫描 the person for feedback/ˈfiːdbæk/反馈 so intensively强烈的密集的 that you start seeing things that aren’t there.

A social psychology experiment from the 1980s makes the point. A makeup artist put realistic/ˌriːəˈlɪstɪk/逼真的-looking “scars” on the faces of the subjects/səbˈdʒekts/题材会话科目, who had been told that the purpose of the experiment was to see how a scar/skɑːr/疤痕 affected the way people reacted/riˈæktɪd/反应 to them. The subjects were to have a conversation with someone, and the experimenters/ɪkˈspɛrəˌmɛntərz/实验员 would observe the reaction. The subjects were shown their scars in a mirror, but then, right before their social encounter, they were told that the scar needed a bit of work;他们被告知伤疤需要做一些工作 moisturizer/ˈmɔɪstʃəraɪzər/保湿霜 would be added to keep it from cracking/ˈkrækɪŋ/裂开. In fact, though, the scar was removed. Then the subjects headed out to前往 their social encounters社交聚会 with a warped/wɔːrpt/扭曲的 idea of what they looked like.

After the encounters, they were debriefed盘问回报: Had they noticed their conversation partner reacting to the scar? Oh yes, many of them said. In fact, when they were shown video of the conversation partner, they could point to these reactions. Sometimes, for example, the person would look away from them—obviously averting/əˈvɜːrtɪŋ/避免转移 their eyes from the scar. So again, a feeling—an uncomfortable feeling of self-consciousness感觉—sponsors/ˈspɑːnsərz/促成 a kind of perceptual/pərˈseptʃuəl/感性的 illusion, a basic misreading of the behavior of others.

Modern life is full of emotional reactions that make little sense except in light of鉴于 the environment in which our species/ˈspiːʃiːz/物种 evolved/iˈvɑːlvd/进化. You may be haunted/ˈhɔːntɪd/不好的事萦绕 for被困扰 hours by some embarrassing/ɪmˈbærəsɪŋ/令人尴尬的 thing you did on a public bus or an airplane, even though you’ll never again see the people who witnessed/ˈwɪtnəst/目击 it and their opinions of you therefore因此 have no consequence. Why would natural selection design organisms to feel discomfort that seems so pointless? Maybe because in the environment of our ancestors it wouldn’t have been pointless; in a hunter-gatherer society, you’re pretty much always performing/pərˈfɔːrmɪŋ/表演 in front of people you’ll see again and whose opinions therefore matter.

My mother used to say, “We wouldn’t spend so much time worrying about what other people think of us if we realized how seldom/ˈseldəm/很少 they do.” She was right; our assumption/əˈsʌmpʃn/假定 that people give much thought to us one way or the other is often an illusion, as is our unspoken sense潜台词 that it matters what pretty much everyone we see thinks of us. But these intuitions/ˌɪntuˈɪʃənz/直觉 were less often不太经常 illusory/ɪˈluːsəri/虚幻的 in the environment of our evolution, and that’s one reason they’re so persistent/pərˈsɪstənt/执着的 today.

### Public Speaking and Other Horrors/ˈhɔːrərz/恐怖

If there’s anything more unnatural than being in the presence/ˈprezns/在场 of a bunch大批 of people you’ve never seen before, it’s speaking to all of them at once. The mere/mɪr/只不过 thought of such an event can give us terrifying illusions about the future. Suppose you’re giving some kind of presentation/ˌpriːzenˈteɪʃn/演示+发布会 tomorrow—maybe it’s a PowerPoint talk, maybe it’s a presentation in some looser松散的 sense. Now suppose one further thing: that you’re like me. If you’re like me, as the time approaches接近, you may feel anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑. What’s more, this anxiety may feature/ˈfiːtʃər/以...为特色 bursts爆发 of conviction信念 that things are going to go badly; you may even envision/ɪnˈvɪʒn/想象 specific/spəˈsɪfɪk/具体的 disaster/dɪˈzæstər/灾难 scenarios/sɪˈnɛrioʊz/情结+设想. And, pretty reliably/rɪ'laɪəbli/可靠地, these visions/ˈvɪʒənz/幻想 will turn out to be wrong; in retrospect/ˈretrəspekt/回顾, these anxiety-sponsored/ˈspɑːnsərd/主办 bursts of apocalyptic/əˌpɑːkəˈlɪptɪk/似末日的 conviction信念 were false positives.

Of course, it’s possible that the anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑 is the reason things wound up以...告终 going well; maybe it spurred/spɜːrd/刺激 you to prepare a great presentation演示. If so, these “false PowerPoint apocalypse/əˈpɑːkəlɪps/末日 positives/ˈpɑzətɪvz/阳性” are different from “false rattlesnake/ˈrætlsneɪk/响尾蛇 positives.” After all, your momentary/ˈmoʊmənteri/短暂的 fear that a rattlesnake was afoot/əˈfʊt/正在活动 had no bearing on与…无关 whether or not a rattlesnake would in fact turn out to be afoot. In contrast,相反your PowerPoint-apocalypse/əˈpɑːkəlɪps/末日 anxiety may conceivably/kən'sivəblɪ/可想而知 have headed off出发（使发生） a PowerPoint apocalypse.

Conceivably/kən'sivəblɪ/可想而知. But let’s face it: though anxiety is sometimes productive有效益的 in this sense, people do a lot of worrying that serves no good purpose. There are people who are beset/bɪˈset/威胁 by images/ˈɪmədʒəz/图像 of themselves projectile/prəˈdʒektl/抛射的-vomiting/ˈvɑːmɪtɪŋ/呕吐 while talking to a crowd人群—even though, come to think of it, they’ve never projectile-vomited while talking to a crowd.

In a particularly特别 perverse/pərˈvɜːrs/人性的 twist扭曲 on PowerPoint-apocalypse末日 anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑, I’ve been known to lie awake the night before a big presentation演示 worrying that if I don’t get to sleep I’ll do a bad job the next day. Actually, that’s an oversimplification. I don’t just worry about not getting to sleep. For the sake of为了 variety/vəˈraɪəti/多样的, I periodically/ˌpiriˈɑdɪkəli/定期地 interrupt打断 that worry with bouts/baʊts/一阵 of self-loathing/ˈloʊðɪŋ/厌恶 for being the kind of person who would worry so much about not getting to sleep that he’d be unable to get to sleep. Then, after my rage愤怒 has subsided/səbˈsaɪdɪd/平息, I get back to the important business of worrying so much about not getting to sleep that I can’t get to sleep.

I’m proud to say that this doesn’t happen before most of my public speaking events. But it’s happened, and I defy/dɪˈfaɪ/藐视 anyone to argue that it is natural selection’s way of increasing my chances of surviving and reproducing繁殖. So too with lots of other anxieties related to human social interaction/ˌɪntəˈrækʃən/相互作用: a sense of dread/dred/恐惧 before going to a cocktail/ˈkɑːkteɪl/鸡尾酒 party that, in fact, is very unlikely to lead to anything that is worth dreading; worrying about how your child is doing at her first slumber/ˈslʌmbər/沉睡 party, something you’re powerless to influence; or worrying about your PowerPoint presentation演示 after you’ve given it—as if fretting/ˈfretɪŋ/烦恼 over whether people liked it will change whether they did.

I’d guess that all three of these examples have at least something to do with the way our environment has changed since the human species evolved. Our ancestral/ænˈsestrəl/祖先的 environment didn’t feature/ˈfiːtʃər/以...为主要组成 cocktail/ˈkɑːkteɪl/鸡尾酒 parties, slumber/ˈslʌmbər/睡眠 parties, or PowerPoint. Our hunter-gatherer ancestors didn’t have to navigate/ˈnævɪɡeɪt/航行 roomfuls/ˈrumˌfʊlz/满屋 of people they’d never met, or send their children off to sleep in homes they’d never seen, or give presentations to an audience consisting/kənˈsɪstɪŋ/有...组成 largely of people they didn’t know very well, if at all.

By the way, this mismatch/kənˈsɪstɪŋ/不匹配 between our evolved nature and the environment in which we find ourselves isn’t just a modern phenomenon/fəˈnɑːmɪnən/现象. For thousands of years, there have been human social environments that weren’t the ones we were designed for. The Buddha was born to a royal family, which means he lived in a society with clusters/ˈklʌstərz/集群 of population much bigger than a hunter-gatherer village. And though PowerPoint hadn’t been invented, there is evidence that people were being called on to speak before large audiences and that something like PowerPoint-apocalypse/əˈpɑːkəlɪps/大灾变 anxiety/æŋˈzaɪəti/焦虑 had taken shape成形. In one discourse/ˈdɪskɔːrs , dɪsˈkɔːrs/演讲 the Buddha listed/ˈlɪstɪd/列举 as one of the “five fears” the “fear of embarrassment/ɪmˈbærəsmənt/尴尬 in assemblies/əˈsɛmbliz/集会.” This fear remains in留在 the top five today; some polls/poʊlz/民意测验, in fact, show public speaking to be the most dreaded/ˈdredɪd/可怕的 activity of all.

Just to be clear (and at the risk of repeating myself), I’m not saying that social anxiety isn’t in any sense a product of natural selection. The ancestral/ænˈsestrəl/祖先的 environment—the environment of our evolution/ˌiːvəˈluːʃn/进化—featured/ˈfiːtʃərd/以...为特色 lots of social interaction/ˌɪntəˈrækʃən/相互作用, and this interaction had great consequence for our genes. If you had low social status地位状态 and few friends, that cut your chances of spreading your genes, so impressing使敬仰 people mattered, even if PowerPoint wasn’t the thing you impressed them with. Similarly, if your offspring/ˈɔːfsprɪŋ/后代 didn’t thrive/θraɪv/兴旺 socially, that boded/ˈboʊdɪd/预示 ill for their reproductive/ˌriːprəˈdʌktɪv/繁殖的 prospects/ˈprɑːspekts/前景, and hence/hens/因此 for your genes. So genes inclining/ɪnˈklaɪnɪŋ/倾向于 us toward anxiety about our social prospects and our progeny’s/ˈprɑːdʒəni/后代 social prospects seem to have become part of the human gene pool.

In this sense our social anxieties can be considered “natural.” But they’re operating/ˈɑːpəreɪtɪŋ/远转 in a very different environment from the environment they were “designed” for, and this fact may explain why they’re often unproductive/ˌʌnprəˈdʌktɪv/效果不佳的, sponsoring/ˈspɑːnsərɪŋ/主办 illusions that are of no value at all. Thus所以 can we have beliefs—about, for example, the near-certainty/ˈsɜːrtnti/确定的事 of impending/ɪmˈpendɪŋ/即将发生的 disaster/dɪˈzæstər/灾难—that are false both in the literal/ˈlɪtərəl/字面意思的 and the pragmatic/præɡˈmætɪk/实用的 sense: they aren’t true, and they aren’t good for us.

If you accept the idea that many of our most troublesome/ˈtrʌblsəm/麻烦得 feelings are in one sense or another illusions, then meditation can be seen as, among other things, a process of dispelling驱散 illusions.

Here’s an example.

In 2003, a couple of months after my first meditation/ˌmedɪˈteɪʃn/冥想 retreat静修, I traveled to Camden/ˈkæmdən/卡姆登, Maine/meɪn/缅因州, to give a talk at an annual/ˈænjuəl/每年的 conference/ˈkɑːnfərəns/会议 called Poptech. The night before my talk I woke up at 2 or 3 a.m. with one of my little bouts/baʊts/一阵阵 of anxiety. After a few minutes of staying awake pondering/ˈpɑːndərɪŋ/沉思 the grave严重的 implications含义 of staying awake pondering grave implications, I decided to sit up in my bed and meditate. I focused on my breathing for a while, but I also focused on the anxiety itself: the tight牢固的 feeling in my gut/ɡʌt/肠道. I tried to look at it, as I’d been taught to do at my meditation retreat, nonjudgmentally不加判断. It wasn’t necessarily a bad thing, and there was no reason to run away from it. It was just a feeling, so I sat there feeling it and watching it. I can’t say that the feeling felt great, but the more I accepted it, observing it nonjudgmentally, the less unpleasant it got.

And then something happened that was much like my big overcaffeination过度疲劳就 breakthrough/ˈbreɪkθruː/突破 at the meditation retreat静修. The anxiety now seemed like something removed from me, something I was just looking at, in my mind’s eye, the way I might look at an abstract/ˈæbstrækt , æbˈstrækt/抽象的 sculpture/ˈskʌlptʃər/雕塑 in a museum/mjuˈziːəm/. It looked like a kind of thick/θɪk/厚厚的, knotted/ˈnɑːtɪd/打结 rope/roʊp/绳 of tightness/ˈtaɪtnəs/坚固, occupying/ˈɑːkjupaɪɪŋ/占据 the part of my abdomen/ˈæbdəmən/腹部 where anxiety is felt, but it didn’t feel like tightness anymore. My anxiety, which had been painful only minutes earlier, now felt neither good nor bad. And not long after it attained/əˈteɪnd/获得 this neutral/ˈnuːtrəl/中立的 status, it dissolved/dɪˈzɑːlvd/溶解 entirely. After a few minutes of this pleasant relief/rɪˈliːf/解脱 from suffering, I lay down and went to sleep. The next day my talk went—I’ll pause/pɔːz/暂停 here to let the suspense/səˈspens/悬念 build—fine.

It’s possible, in principle, to attack anxiety from another angle/ˈæŋɡl/角度. Rather than focus on the feeling itself, as I did that night, you investigate/ɪnˈvestɪɡeɪt/研究 the thoughts associated/əˈsoʊsieɪtɪd/相关的 with it. This is the way cognitive/ˈkɑːɡnətɪv/认知的-behavioral/bɪ'heɪvjərəl/关于行为的 therapy/ˈθerəpi/疗法 works: your therapist治疗专家 asks questions like “Is there much likelihood可能性 of screwing up搞砸 that presentation, judging by your history of giving presentations?” and “If you did screw it up, would your career really vaporize/ˈveɪpəraɪz/使气化 on the spot/spɑːt/?”当场 Then, if you see that the thoughts are lacking/ˈlækɪŋ/缺乏 in logic, the attendant/əˈtendənt/伴随的 feelings may weaken.

So cognitive-behavioral therapy is very much in the spirit of mindfulness meditation. 因此，认知行为疗法非常符合正念冥想的精神。Both in some sense question the validity/vəˈlɪdəti/有效的 of feelings. It’s just that with cognitive-behavioral therapy, the questioning is more literal/ˈlɪtərəl/字面意义的. By the way, if you’re thinking about combining/kəmˈbaɪnɪŋ/组合联合 these two approaches方法 and becoming famous as the founder of a whole new school of therapy, I have bad news: mindfulness-based cognitive-behavioral therapy—MBCBT—already exists.

### Levels of Delusion/dɪˈluːʒn/错觉: A Recap/ˈriːkæp/概括

If I’ve done my job, you should be feeling a bit deceived/dɪˈsiːvd/欺骗—not by me, but by your feelings. And I haven’t even gotten to the deepest/ˈdipəst/深沉的, subtlest/ˈsʌtəlɪst/微妙的 deceptions/dɪˈsɛpʃənz/骗局 perpetrated/ˈpɜːrpətreɪtɪd/干坏事 by your feelings. I’ll save those for later in the book. Meanwhile同时, let’s review several senses in which feelings can be misleading:

1. Our feelings weren’t designed to depict/dɪˈpɪkt/描绘 reality accurately/ˈækjərətli/准确地 even in our “natural” environment. Feelings were designed to get the genes of our hunter-gatherer ancestors into the next generation. If that meant deluding/dɪˈluːdɪŋ/欺骗 our ancestors—making them so fearful that they “see” a snake that isn’t actually there, say—so be it. This class of illusions, “natural” illusions, helps explain a lot of distortions/dɪˈstɔrʃənz/失真 in our apprehension/ˌæprɪˈhenʃn/忧虑 of the world, especially the social world: warped/wɔːrpt/扭曲的 ideas about ourselves, about our friends, our kin/kɪn/家属, our enemies, our casual/ˈkæʒuəl/随便的 acquaintances/əˈkweɪntənsɪz/认识的人泛泛之交, and even strangers. (Which about covers it, right?)这其中包括了什么，对吗？

2. The fact that we’re not living in a “natural” environment makes our feelings even less reliable/rɪˈlaɪəbl/可信赖的 guides to reality. Feelings that are designed to create illusions, such as seeing a snake that isn’t there, may at least have the virtue/ˈvɜːrtʃuː/美德 of increasing the organism’s prospects/ˈprɑːspekts/前景 for surviving and reproducing. But the modern environment can take various kinds of feelings that served our ancestors in this Darwinian sense and render/ˈrendər/给予 them counterproductive适得其反 in the same sense—they may actually lower a person’s life expectancy/ɪkˈspektənsi/预期. Violent/ˈvaɪələnt/暴力的 rage愤怒 and the yearnings渴望 of a sweet tooth爱吃甜食 are good examples. These feelings were once “true” at least in the pragmatic/ˈjɜrnɪŋz/务实的 sense of guiding the organism toward behaviors that were in some sense good for it. But now they’re likely to mislead误导.

3. Underlying it all这一切背后 is the happiness delusion. As the Buddha emphasized/ˈemfəsaɪzd/强调的, our ongoing/ˈɑːnɡoʊɪŋ/不间断的 attempts企图 to feel better tend to倾向于 involve/ɪnˈvɑːlv/涉及 an overestimation高估 of how long “better” is going to last. What’s more, when “better” ends, it can be followed by “worse”—an unsettled/ˌʌnˈsetld , ʌnˈsetld/不安的 feeling, a thirst for more. Long before psychologists were describing the hedonic/həˈdɑnɪk/享乐的 treadmill/ˈtredmɪl/跑步机比喻单调的工作, the Buddha saw it.
快乐水车（Hedonic Treadmill）是指收入增长，但快乐却不相应增长，即所谓的“有钱不快乐”现象。

What he couldn’t have seen is its source来源. We were built by natural selection, and natural selection works to maximize/ˈmæksɪmaɪz/最大化 genetic/dʒəˈnetɪk/遗传的 proliferation/prəˌlɪfəˈreɪʃn/涌现, period某一时代的. In addition to除了 not caring about the truth per se,/ˌpɜːr ˈseɪ/本质 it doesn’t care about our long-term happiness. It will readily/ˈredɪli/轻而易举地 delude/dɪˈluːd/欺骗 us about what does and doesn’t bring lasting happiness if that delusion错觉 has propelled/prəˈpeld/推动 our ancestors’ genes forward. In fact, natural selection doesn’t even care about our short-term happiness. Just look at the price of all those false positives: being terrified by a snake that isn’t there ninety-nine times in a row连续 could take a toll付出代价 on a person’s psychological心理的 well-being幸福. The good news, of course, is that on the hundredth time the fear may have helped keep our ancestors alive and thus led ultimately/ˈʌltɪmətli/最终 to the creation of us. Still, we are the heirs/ɛrz/继承人 of this tendency/ˈtendənsi/趋势 toward false positives—not just in the realm/relm/领域 of snakes but in the realm of other fears and everyday anxieties. As Aaron/ˈɛrən/ Beck,正如艾伦·贝克 who is sometimes called the founder of cognitive/ˈkɑːɡnətɪv/认知的-behavioral/bɪ'heɪvjərəl/关于行为的 therapy/ˈθerəpi/疗法, has written, “The cost of survival of the lineage/ˈlɪniɪdʒ/世系 may be a lifetime of discomfort.” Or, as the Buddha would have put it, a lifetime of dukkha/ˈduːkə/苦. And the Buddha might have added: But this cost is avoidable/əˈvɔɪdəbl/可以避免的, if you address处理 the psychological causes of it head-on迎面的.

Obviously, this chapter hasn’t been a blanket/ˈblæŋkɪt/总括的 indictment/ɪnˈdaɪtmənt/控诉 of human feelings. Some, maybe most, of our feelings serve us reasonably/ˈriːznəbli/合理的 well; they don’t much distort/dɪˈstɔːrt/歪曲 our view of reality, and they help keep us alive and flourishing/ˈflɜːrɪʃɪŋ/繁荣. My attraction吸引力 to apples, my aversion/əˈvɜːrʒn/厌恶 to grasping/ˈɡræspɪŋ/抓 knife blades/bleɪdz/刀刃 and scaling/ˈskeɪlɪŋ/攀登 skyscrapers/ˈskaɪˌskreɪpərz/摩天大楼—all to the good. Still, I hope you can see the virtue/ˈvɜːrtʃuː/美德 of subjecting/səbˈdʒektɪŋ/服从 your feelings to investigation调查—inspecting/ɪnˈspektɪŋ/审视 them to see which ones deserve obedience/oʊˈbidiəns/服从 and which ones don’t, and trying to free yourself from the grip/ɡrɪp/紧握 of the ones that don’t.

And I hope you can see why this is difficult. It’s in the nature of feelings to make it hard to tell the valuable ones from the harmful ones, the reliable/rɪˈlaɪəbl/可靠的 from the misleading. One thing all feelings have in common is that they were originally/əˈrɪdʒənəli/起初 “designed” to convince/kənˈvɪns/说服 you to follow them. They feel right and true almost by definition/ˌdefɪˈnɪʃn/定义. They actively积极的 discourage阻止 you from viewing them objectively客观地.

Maybe this helps explain why it took me so long to get the hang/hæŋ/ of诀窍 mindfulness meditation正念冥想—why it never “worked” for me until I took the full-immersion/ɪˈmɜːrʒn/专心 approach方式 and went on a one-week silent meditation retreat. But it’s not the only reason. There are other things about the way feelings influence us that make it hard to turn the tables on them扭转局面 and reverse/rɪˈvɜːrs/颠倒 the servant/ˈsɜːrvənt/仆人-master relationship. And there are other things about the way the mind works that make it hard to sink/sɪŋk/下陷 into a meditative state冥想状态 in the first place. Indeed, it was only after I went on that first retreat that I started to realize how challenging/ˈtʃælɪndʒɪŋ/具有挑战性的 it can be—and why it can be so challenging—to get to the point where mindfulness meditation is really working.

Then again, rewarding奖赏 things often require需要 work. And another thing I started to realize on that retreat is how great the rewards of mindfulness meditation can be. Indeed, those rewards go so far beyond the ones hinted/ˈhɪntɪd/暗示示意 at in this chapter that I fear I may have trivialized/ˈtrɪviəlaɪzd/轻视 the meditative/ˈmedɪteɪtɪv/沉思的 experience. Sure, starting to get a grip on把握 a few of your more troublesome/ˈtrʌblsəm/麻烦的 feelings is great—and if knowing that these feelings are in one sense or another “false” helps you do that, so much the better. But the taming/ˈteɪmɪŋ/驯服 of troublesome feelings can be just the beginning. There are other dimensions/dɪˈmɛnʃənz/维 of mindfulness正念, and there are insights洞察力 much deeper and subtler/ˈsʌtələr/微妙的 than the realization/ˌriːələˈzeɪʃn/认识 that maybe surrendering to road rage isn’t such a great idea.

## 4 Bliss/blɪs/极乐, Ecstasy/'ekstəsi/忘我, and More Important Reasons to Meditate

Strictly严格地 speaking, “silent meditation retreat” is a misnomer/ˌmɪsˈnoʊmər/用词不当. On my first weeklong为时一周 retreat静修, back in the summer of 2003, there were two times when students spoke with a meditation teacher. On one of those occasions/əˈkeɪʒnz/...时候, a group of eight or nine of us “yogis”/ˈjoʊgiz/瑜伽师 assembled/əˈsembld/聚集 in a room near the meditation hall. There, for forty-five minutes, we could air公开发表 any problems we were having.

Which was good, because I was having a problem: I couldn’t meditate! I hadn’t yet had my big meditation breakthrough, that moment when I viewed my overcaffeination咖啡因过度的 mindfully专心地正念地 and transcended/trænˈsendɪd/超越 it. All I had done was spend a day and a half failing/ˈfeɪlɪŋ/失败 to concentrate/ˈkɑːnsntreɪt/聚精会神 on my breath. I tried and tried, but I just couldn’t stop thinking about stuff.

So when my turn came to speak, I gave voice to this frustration/frʌˈstreɪʃn/挫败. The ensuing/ɪnˈsuːɪŋ/接着发生的 dialogue with my teacher went something like this:

So you notice that your mind keeps wandering?

Yes.

That’s good.

It’s good that my mind keeps wandering?

No. It’s good that you notice that your mind keeps wandering.

But it happens, like, all the time.

That’s even better. It means you’re noticing a lot.

This didn’t have the uplifting/ˌʌpˈlɪftɪŋ/令人振奋的 effect that my teacher had perhaps intended/ɪnˈtendɪd/意欲达到的. I felt a bit patronized/ˈpeɪtrənaɪzd/摆出高人一头的派头. It was kind of like those times when one of my daughters, back in the toddler/ˈtɑːdlər/蹒跚学步的孩子 stage/steɪdʒ/阶段, would fail abjectly悲惨的 at something and I’d strain/streɪn/竭力 to find an encouraging word. Maybe she would fall down while trying to get on a tricycle/ˈtraɪsɪkl/三轮踏板车, and I’d say, “You got back up! What a big girl!”—neglecting/nɪˈɡlektɪŋ/忽略 to note that, actually, big girls don’t fall down while trying to get on tricycles in the first place.

But I’ve since come to realize that this first bit of feedback反馈 I ever got from a meditation teacher wasn’t just strained/streɪnd/紧张的 encouragement鼓舞. My teacher was right: by frequently/ˈfriːkwəntli/频繁地 noticing that my mind was wandering, I was breaking new ground.开拓新天地 In my ordinary, workaday/ˈwɜːrkədeɪ/平日 life, when my mind wandered I would follow it over hill and dale/deɪl/山谷, not even aware that I was being led/led/引领. Now I was following it for only short stretches/ˈstretʃɪz/一段时间 before breaking free—at least, briefly/ˈbriːfli/短暂的 free, free for long enough to realize it had been leading me, a realization/ˌriːələˈzeɪʃn/领悟 that would then give way to its leading me some more.

To put this in more scientific-sounding terminology/ˌtɜːrmɪˈnɑːlədʒi/术语: I was beginning to observe the workings of what psychologists心理学家 call the “default/dɪˈfɔːlt/默认预设 mode network.” This is a network in the brain that, according to brain- scan studies, is active/ˈæktɪv/活跃的 when we’re doing nothing in particular/pərˈtɪkjələr/特定的—not talking to people, not focusing on our work or any other task/tæsk/任务, not playing a sport or reading a book or watching a movie. It is the network along which our mind wanders when it’s wandering.这是一个网络，当我们的思想在游荡时，它会沿着这个网络游荡。

As for where the mind wanders to: well, lots of places, obviously, but studies have shown that these places are usually in the past or the future; you may ponder/ˈpɑːndər/思考 recent events or distant, strong memories; you may dread/dred/恐惧 upcoming/ˈʌpkʌmɪŋ/即将来到的 events or eagerly/ˈigərli/急切地 anticipate/ænˈtɪsɪpeɪt/预料 them; you may strategize/'strætəˌdʒaɪz/筹划 about how to head off防止 some looming/ˈluːmɪŋ/逼近的 crisis/ˈkraɪsɪs/危机 or fantasize/ˈfæntəsaɪz/幻想 about romancing/ˈroʊmænsɪŋ/和某人谈情说爱虚构 the attractive诱人的 person in the cubicle/ˈkjuːbɪkl/小房间 next to yours. What you’re generally/ˈdʒenrəli/通常地 not doing when your mind is wandering is directly experiencing/ɪkˈspɪriənsɪŋ/经历 the present moment.

In one sense it’s not hard to quiet your default/dɪˈfɔːlt/默认的 mode network: just do something that requires/rɪˈkwaɪərz/需要 concentration/ˌkɑːnsnˈtreɪʃn/专注. Do a crossword puzzle/ˈpʌzl/迷智力游戏 or try to juggle/ˈdʒʌɡl/玩杂耍 three tennis/ˈtenɪs/网球 balls. Until you get to a point where juggling is second nature, you probably won’t be fantasizing/ˈfæntəsaɪzɪŋ/做白日梦 about the attractive person in the cubicle/ˈkjuːbɪkl/小房间 next to yours.

What’s hard is to abandon the default mode network when you’re not doing much of anything—like, say, when you’re sitting in a meditation hall with your eyes closed. That’s why you try to focus on the breath: the mind needs some object of focus to wean/wiːn/使断奶 it from its habitual/həˈbɪtʃuəl/惯常的 meandering/miˈændərɪŋ/蜿蜒曲折.

But even with this crutch/krʌtʃ/拐杖 available/əˈveɪləbl/可获得的, you may find yourself in the position I was in during the early part of that retreat静修期间: being repeatedly/rɪˈpiːtɪdli/再三地, frequently经常, helplessly carried away from experiential/ɪkˌspɪriˈenʃl/经验的 mode into default/dɪˈfɔːlt/默认 mode. Every time you realize you’ve been carried away,被迷住 it’s tempting/ˈtemptɪŋ/诱惑 to feel frustration/frʌˈstreɪʃn/挫败 or anger or (my personal favorite) self-loathing/ˈloʊðɪŋ/厌恶. But the standard instruction/ɪnˈstrʌkʃn/指令 is to not waste time on that; instead just note the fact that your mind was wandering, and perhaps even note what kind of wandering it was doing (dreading/ˈdredɪŋ/非常害怕 work, looking forward to lunch, lamenting/ləˈmentɪŋ/痛惜 a bad golf shot), and then return your focus to the breath. My teacher, in highlighting/ˈhaɪlaɪtɪŋ/突出显示 the silver/ˈsɪlvər/银 lining/ˈlaɪnɪŋ/做内衬 surrounding my cloud of diffuse/dɪˈfjuːs , dɪˈfjuːz/弥漫的 attention, was no doubt trying to encourage me to do just that.我的老师在强调围绕着我分散注意力的阴云的一线希望时，无疑是在鼓励我这样做。the silver lining 一线希望

This turned out to be good guidance. By interrupting打断 the workings of my default/dɪˈfɔːlt/默认 mode network, by “snapping/ˈsnæpɪŋ/迅速恢复 out of it”振作起来 and realizing that my mind was wandering and then returning to my breath, I was diluting/daɪˈluːtɪŋ/削弱 the network’s dominance/ˈdɑːmɪnəns/支配地位. As I got better at focusing on my breath for longer periods/ˈpɪriədz/一段时间, this network would become less and less active. At least, that’s a pretty fair guess. Brain-scan studies have shown this happening in novice/ˈnɑːvɪs/新手 meditators冥想者. Such studies have also shown that highly adept/əˈdept , ˈædept/内行 meditators, people who have meditated for tens of thousands of hours and are in a whole ’nother league/liːɡ/等级*联盟 from me, exhibit/ɪɡˈzɪbɪt/展示 dramatically/drə'mætɪkli/显著地 subdued/səbˈduːd/克制 default/dɪˈfɔːlt/默认 mode networks while meditating.

When the default mode network subsides/səbˈsaɪdz/平息—when the mind stops wandering—it can be a good feeling. There can be a sense of liberation/ˌlɪbəˈreɪʃən/释放 from your chattering/ˈtʃætərɪŋ/喋喋不休 mind, a sense of peace, even deep peace. You may not get this feeling every time you meditate, but for some people it happens often enough that it’s one of the main inducements/ɪnˈdusmənts/诱因 to get back on the cushion软垫 the next day, part of the positive reinforcement/ˌriːɪnˈfɔːrsmənt/强化 that sustains/səˈsteɪnz/维持 the practice.

But once you get to this point, once you’ve used your breath to gain/ɡeɪn/获得 some measure of某种程度 escape from your wandering mind, you’re at a crossroads. There are two different paths/pæðz/路径 you can follow, corresponding to对应于 two different types of meditation.

### Concentration/ˌkɑːnsnˈtreɪʃn/专注 and Mindfulness

One path is to sustain/səˈsteɪn/维持 the focus on your breath, the focus it felt good to establish/ɪˈstæblɪʃ/建立 in the first place, for a long, long time; and try to tighten/ˈtaɪtn/加固 and deepen the focus, becoming more immersed/ɪˈmɜːrst/沉浸在 in the breath. Then just keep going. You may find yourself feeling better and better and better. This is called concentration meditation, and the object of concentration doesn’t have to be breath. Depending on the meditation tradition, the object can be a mantra/ˈmæntrə/咒语, an imagined visual/ˈvɪʒuəl/视觉的 image/ˈɪmɪdʒ/形象, a recurring/rɪˈkɜːrɪŋ/循环 sound, whatever.

Concentration meditation is sometimes referred to提到 as serenity/sə'renəti/宁静 meditation—which makes sense, because the concentration can bring serenity. Indeed, the concentration can bring more than serenity. Sometimes, if sustained/səˈsteɪnd/使保持 for long enough, it can bring powerful feelings of bliss/blɪs/幸福 or ecstasy/ˈekstəsi/狂喜+摇头丸.

And I mean powerful feelings of bliss or ecstasy. On the fifth night of my first retreat, I had been experimenting with a modified/ˈmɑːdɪfaɪd/被改进的 version of the standard focus-on-your-breath technique. I was focusing on my breath during the inhale/ɪnˈheɪl/吸入吸气 but on sounds during the exhale/eksˈheɪl/呼出. Focusing on sounds was easy, because it was a hot summer night in rural/ˈrʊrəl/乡村的 Massachusetts/ˌmæsəˈtʃusəts/马萨诸塞州, and the windows of the meditation hall were open, and a chorus/ˈkɔːrəs/合唱 of insects/ˈɪnˌsɛkts/昆虫—cicadas/sɪˈkeɪdəz/知了, I assume/əˈsuːm/认为—was chanting/ˈtʃæntɪŋ/吟诵 loudly. As I meditated I got more tightly focused on my breath and the chanting, both of which seemed to grow in intensity/ɪnˈtensəti/强烈 as they absorbed/əbˈzɔːrbd/全神贯注+被...吸引 my attention more and more fully. At some point, after twenty-five or thirty minutes of meditation, I had a dramatic/drəˈmætɪk/戏剧的突然的巨大的 and powerful experience that’s hard to describe. Later in this book I’ll do my best to describe it, but for now I’ll just say that it was very, very vivid/ˈvɪvɪd/生动的.

In fact, I’d like to add another “very” to that last sentence. I don’t know from firsthand experience what it would be like to take LSD and follow it with a heroin chaser, but I’d guess it’s something like the experience I had that night: intensely visual, bordering on hallucinatory, and intensely blissful. I remember feeling as if my jaw, in particular, had been injected with some powerful narcotic. My whole being buzzed with joy and vision, and I felt as if I had crossed some threshold and entered another realm.事实上，我想在最后一句话中再加一句“非常”。从第一手的经验来看，我不知道服用迷幻药后再服用海洛因追踪器会是什么感觉，但我猜这和我那晚的经历差不多：强烈的视觉感受，近乎幻觉，极度幸福。我记得我感觉自己的下巴好像被注射了某种强力麻醉剂。我的整个身心都充满了喜悦和憧憬，我感觉自己仿佛跨过了某个门槛，进入了另一个领域。

If the experience I had that night sounds appealing, I have some bad news. The kind of meditation that gave me this peak experience—concentration meditation—isn’t the kind of meditation this book is about. And it’s not the kind of meditation that the retreat I was on was supposed to be about. When, at the end of the retreat, I proudly told Michael Grady, one of the retreat’s two teachers, about my peak experience, he said, with a nonchalance that I found a bit dispiriting, “Sounds nice. But don’t get attached to it.” This retreat was supposed to be about mindfulness meditation, the second of the two basic meditative paths you can take.

Mindfulness and concentration are such important Buddhist aspirations that each constitutes one of the eight parts of the Eightfold Path that a deeply committed Buddhist is supposed to tread. In fact, they are the seventh and eighth parts, respectively. But that doesn’t mean they are the culminating parts, because the term Eightfold Path is misleading in its suggestion of sequence. The idea isn’t that you completely master the first of these eight factors, “right view,” and then move on to the second and third—“right intention” and “right speech”—and so on. There is too much interdependence among the eight factors for such linear progress. So, for example, progress in the seventh and eighth factors—“right mindfulness” and “right concentration”—will help foster a deeply experiential understanding of core Buddhist principles and hence strengthen “right view.”

What’s more—and what’s more relevant to this chapter—although right mindfulness comes before right concentration on the Eightfold Path, cultivating mindfulness may require first cultivating concentration. That’s why the early part of a mindfulness meditation session typically involves focusing on your breath or on something else. Mustering some concentration is what liberates you from the default mode network and stops the mental chatter that normally preoccupies you.

Then, having used concentration meditation to stabilize your attention, you can shift your attention to whatever it is you’re now going to be mindful of—usually things that are happening inside you, such as emotions or bodily sensations, though you can also focus on things in the outside world, such as sounds. Meanwhile the breath recedes to the background, though it may remain your “anchor,” something you’re fuzzily aware of even as you examine other things, and something you may return your attention to from time to time. The key thing is that, whatever you’re experiencing, you experience it mindfully, with that ironic combination of closeness and critical distance that I mentioned in describing how I had viewed the feeling of overcaffeination.

I realize that mindfully viewing some feeling you’re having—anxiety or restlessness, for example—may not sound as exotically appealing as the psychedelic ecstasy that concentration meditation brought me on that summer night in Massachusetts. But there are several consolations of pursuing mindfulness meditation, and some of them have their exotic aspects.

### Mindfulness in Real Life

First, mindfulness meditation is good training. Viewing your feelings mindfully while on a meditation cushion can make you better at viewing them mindfully in everyday life, which means your life will be less governed by misleading or unproductive feelings. You spend less time fuming at drivers who (inexcusably oblivious to the important appointment you’re late for) take a couple of seconds to hit the accelerator after the light turns green; less time yelling at your kids or your spouse or yourself or whoever you’re inclined to yell at; less time pointlessly resenting indignities inflicted on you; less time having revenge fantasies about the inflicters (not that such fantasies are without their pleasures!); and so on.

Another virtue of mindfulness meditation is that it can make you more attuned to beauty. This effect is especially dramatic on a retreat, when you’re doing so much meditating and when your isolation from the “real world” is limiting the number of things for you to worry about, eagerly anticipate, or bitterly regret. With your default mode network deprived of fresh fuel, it’s easier to stay in experiential mode.

This deepened absorption in everyday sensations can change your consciousness dramatically. Birdsong can sound surreally pretty. Textures of all kinds—the surface of bricks, of asphalt, of wood—can be enthralling. During a mid-retreat walk in the forest, I once found myself caressing—yes, pretty literally caressing—the intricately sculpted trunk of a tree. And believe me when I tell you I’m not the tree-hugging type.

More generally, I’m not the stop-and-smell-the-roses type. On a typical workday, here is the way I eat lunch: open a can of sardines, get a fork, eat the sardines directly out of the can while standing in front of the kitchen sink, throw the can away. There: done with lunch.

But after a few days on my first retreat I found myself taking the opposite approach to eating. Which is all the more surprising given how spartan the food was by conventional standards: strictly vegetarian, no store-bought snacks, and, most disturbing of all, chocolate on a less-than-daily basis.

The first time I entered the dining hall at mealtime, I was puzzled as to why so many people were eating with their eyes closed. Before long I got the picture: shuttering the visual field brought absorption in taste closer to 100 percent. The result was sublime. A single bite of salad—chewed slowly, savored not just for flavor but for texture—could bring fifteen seconds of near bliss. So imagine the buttered cornbread!

On retreat, common visual experiences can assume a kind of drama. I remember reaching to open an aged screen door and suddenly feeling as if I were watching a movie—one of those scenes where an ultra-close-up shot of something ordinary signals something momentous to come. Of course, nothing momentous came, unless you count the next dramatic visual experience, which tended to come soon. Once, on that first retreat, I was in my dorm room, jotting observations on index cards, when I looked up at the drawn window shade and recorded this: “While writing this card, get dazed by beauty of mottled pattern—sun hitting it through trees and screen. Feels like a narcotic.”

Speaking of pharmaceuticals: if I’m going to sing the praises of meditation retreats, I’m obliged to mention possible side effects. The very silence and seclusion that frees you from workaday concerns can also give you time to get immersed in other concerns—notably personal or family issues that in everyday life might visit you, and even revisit you, but not settle in for a long stay. What’s more, being in closer-than-usual contact with the actual workings of your mind can lead you to confront issues with a new and perhaps unsettling honesty. Which is just as well, when you think about it. Isn’t much of the point of Buddhism to confront suffering rather than evade it, and by confronting it, by looking at it unflinchingly, undermine it?

In my experience, this usually works. I tend to “work through” issues that haunt me on a retreat, gaining a new and healthy perspective on them. Still, the working-through part can take a while and can get intense. I sometimes tell people that going on a long meditation retreat is like doing extreme sports for the mind: it features both the sublime and the harrowing. I’m happy to say that in my experience the ratio is about 4 to 1.

When I’m not on retreat, and my morning meditation is confined to thirty minutes (perhaps followed by a shorter sitting later in the day), the rewards are less dramatic. None of my neighbors has ever dialed 911 to report that I was caressing their trees. Still, so long as I keep up my daily meditation, I am more likely to stop while walking my dogs and look at the bark of a tree. And I’m more inclined to savor my sardines, or, while eating them, actually see the trees through the kitchen window.

At this point I will refrain from delivering an extended sermon on “living in the moment” or “being in the present” or “staying in the now” or any other combination of those three verbs and those three nouns. With everyone from evangelical ministers to professional golfers singing the praises of present-mindedness, this theme needs no assistance from me.

Besides, to put too much emphasis on living in the now would be to give short shrift to the potential of mindfulness meditation, and, in a sense, to mislead you about the heart of Buddhist teaching. As I suggested in the first chapter, the Satipatthana Sutta—the ancient text known as The Four Foundations of Mindfulness—contains no injunction to live in the now. In fact, there is no term in the entire text that is translated as “now” or “the present.”

{There is a term that can be translated as “in this world” or “in this very life” and is occasionally translated as “here and now,” but in context it refers to the time when the rewards of a certain level of meditative attainment will come—that is, during this cycle of life, as opposed to after death—and isn’t part of the instruction for how to realize mindfulness.}

This doesn’t mean that “staying in the present” wasn’t part of the experience of Buddhist meditators two millennia ago. If you focus on your breathing or on bodily sensations, as prescribed in ancient mindfulness texts, the present is where you will be. Still, if you want to go full-on Buddhist—if you want to take the red pill—you need to understand that staying in the present, though an inherent part of mindfulness meditation, isn’t the point of the exercise. It is the means to an end, not the end itself.

### Approaches to Enlightenment

Which brings us to the subject of enlightenment. Becoming enlightened, in the Buddhist sense of the term, would entail wholly ridding yourself of the twin illusions from which people tend to suffer: the illusion about what’s “in here”—inside your mind—and about what’s “out there” in the rest of the world.† Just in case this state of perfect understanding doesn’t sound appealing, I should add that another term used to describe it is liberation, as in liberation from suffering (or at least from dukkha, however you choose to translate that multifaceted word). And yet another term for this state is nirvana. Surely you’ve heard of nirvana?

{Buddhist literature includes various depictions of what it would mean to be enlightened (or “awakened,” to use a more literal translation of the term commonly translated as “enlightened”; see the Note on Terminology at the end of this book). But among the most commonly cited elements of enlightenment is the dispelling of these two illusions. As we’ll see in chapter 13, another commonly cited element of enlightenment—overcoming tanha, or craving—is, arguably, so tightly intertwined with the dispelling of these two illusions as to be tantamount to it.}

There is some controversy over how accessible enlightenment is. Some people think it’s a realistic goal for all of us. Some people think it’s so elusive that to find it you’ll have to head off to a forest in Asia and work on the project 24/7 for months, if not years. And some people say it’s not really attainable at all. True, pure enlightenment, in this view, is like what mathematicians call an asymptote: something you can get closer and closer to but never quite reach.

How many people there are who have attained enlightenment, and for that matter whether there are any, are questions I’m not qualified to answer. But there do seem to be people who so thoroughly dispel illusions about what’s “in here” and what’s “out there” that they cross some sort of threshold. They attain and then more or less sustain a state of consciousness that is radically different from ordinary consciousness—and that, by their account, is exceedingly pleasant.

Which leads to the obvious question: How did they do it? How exactly would you go about getting enlightened—or, at least, getting close enough to enlightenment to feel genuinely transformed, to feel that you’ve entered a whole new world?

There’s a natural tendency to think of these transformations as sudden and powerful. After all, isn’t that the way the great spiritual apprehensions happen? Moses and the burning bush, Muhammad in the cave, Paul on the road to Damascus? Even the Buddha is said to have seen the light in a single, epic episode of meditation. And if you doubt how vividly dramatic this moment was, just check out the enlightenment scene in the movie Little Buddha (which, like The Matrix, features Keanu Reeves in the lead role). Talk about great visuals!

If you think of meditation this way—think of its aim as being a dramatic and overwhelming experience of revelation, of enlightenment—you might conclude that, of the two meditative paths I’ve described, concentration meditation would be the surer route. Certainly my own inadvertent experiment with extended concentration meditation during that first retreat suggested as much; I did have the sense that I was suddenly getting a radically truer view of things and that I had made some kind of big breakthrough. And, though I don’t think this experience brought me anywhere near actual enlightenment, I do think that some people get into or at least near that rare territory in sudden and dramatic ways via concentration meditation.

But since that first retreat, I’ve come to believe that, as dramatic and profound as that experience felt, and as unspectacular as mindfulness meditation may sound by comparison, mindfulness meditation can in fact lead to the same kind of place, a place of sharply and vividly altered perspective. The routine business of mindfulness—observing the world inside you and outside you with inordinate care—can do more than tone down troublesome feelings and enhance your sense of beauty. It can, in a slow, incremental, often uneven yet ultimately systematic way, transform your view of what’s really “out there” and what’s really “in here.” What begins as a modest pursuit—a way to relieve stress or anxiety, cool anger, or dial down self-loathing just a notch—can lead to profound realizations about the nature of things, and commensurately profound feelings of freedom and happiness. An essentially therapeutic endeavor can turn into a deeply philosophical and spiritual endeavor. This is the third virtue of mindfulness meditation: it offers a path to liberation from the Matrix.

I wish I could say that the entire preceding paragraph is based on my own experience, that I walk around seeing things with near-perfect clarity, having undergone an enduring and momentous shift of perspective, and that I live in the general vicinity of bliss. Sadly, no. But I’ve now talked to enough highly adept meditators, who have traveled much farther along the path than I have, to feel confident that the preceding paragraph is true. We’ll be hearing testimony from some of them that I hope will give you the same kind of confidence.

What’s more, I’ve personally experienced pretty dramatic, if sometimes fleeting, shifts of perspective. I’ve already mentioned some of these—notably my moments of suddenly transformed relationship to my anxiety and, earlier, to my overcaffeination. And one thing I’ve noticed in talking to those highly adept meditators is that, almost invariably, they recognize these and other kinds of experiences I’ve had as the kinds of experiences they too had somewhere along the path. Indeed, in many cases these experiences seem to have paved the way for their more encompassing illuminations. Though I haven’t seen the whole edifice of enlightenment, apparently I’ve seen some of the building blocks.

### Insight Meditation

Strictly speaking, it isn’t just mindfulness meditation that has let me see these building blocks. The mindfulness meditation I’ve done has been within a particular school of meditation known as Vipassana (pronounced vih PAW suh nuh). Vipassana is an ancient word that denotes clear vision and is usually translated as “insight.” The name of the place where I did that meditation retreat in 2003, the Insight Meditation Society, could be rendered as the Society for Vipassana Meditation, which in fact is what it is.

Vipassana teaching puts so much emphasis on mindfulness that some people use the two terms interchangeably. But the distinction is important. Mindfulness meditation is a technique you can use for various purposes, beginning with simple stress reduction. But if you are doing mindfulness meditation within a traditional Vipassana framework, the ultimate purpose is more ambitious: to gain insight. And not just insight in the everyday sense of understanding some new stuff. The idea is to see the true nature of reality, and Buddhist texts going back more than a millennium spell out what that means. They define vipassana as apprehending what are known as “the three marks of existence.”

Two of the three marks of existence sound as if, actually, they wouldn’t be too hard to apprehend. The first is impermanence. Who could deny that nothing lasts forever? The second mark of existence is dukkha—suffering, unsatisfactoriness. And who among us hasn’t suffered and felt unsatisfied? With these two marks of existence, the point of Vipassana meditation isn’t so much to comprehend them—since basic comprehension is easy enough—as to comprehend them with new subtlety, to see them at such high resolution that you deeply appreciate their pervasiveness. But the third mark of existence, “not-self,” is different. With not-self, comprehension itself is a challenge.† Yet according to Buddhist doctrine, it is crucially important to grasp not-self if your goal is vipassana: seeing reality with true clarity, such clarity as to pave the path to enlightenment.

My own progress toward grasping not-self began on that first meditation retreat. In fact, in retrospect, it began around the time I told my teacher that my wandering mind was keeping me from focusing on my breath. Noticing that your mind is wandering doesn’t seem like a very profound insight; and in fact it isn’t one, notwithstanding my teacher’s kind insistence on giving it a standing ovation. But it’s not without significance. What I was saying in that session with my teacher was that I—that is, my “self,” the thing I had thought was in control—don’t readily control the most fundamental aspect of my mental life: what I’m thinking about.

As we’ll see in the next chapter, this absence of control is part, though by no means all, of what the Buddha had in mind when he emphasized the importance of grasping not-self. And later in the book we’ll see that, however ironic it sounds, grappling with the sense in which you don’t exist is a step toward putting you—or at least “you”—in charge.

## 5 The Alleged Nonexistence of Your Self

